5 • City of Song
An audacious man-of-the-people opened a new theater in Bordeaux on May 30, 1861. Martial Leglise, better known to his contemporaries by his nickname “Bazas,” modeled his new enterprise on the elaborate and extremely popular cafés-concerts of Paris. He was convinced that what worked for the Parisians would work equally well for the people of Bordeaux. His Alcazar Theater stood in Place Napoleon (now place Stalingrad) at the other end of the Pont de Pierre that links the city center to the right bank of the Garonne River (fig. 3). It was no lonely outpost of morally dubious entertainment. It fit right in with the changing times, and the theater building itself reflected those times. A large dock surmounted the neoclassical, symmetrical facade, reminding theatergoers of a subtle but palpable shift in their lives-—the increasingly firm demarcation between work time and leisure time. Bazas, who oversaw the construction of the Alcazar Theater, was as attuned to the bourgeois expression “time is money” as he was to the lucrative potential of drinks mixed with songs therein.1
But when that perspicacious entrepreneur opened the doors of Bordeaux’s first café-concert, he alienated some high-minded theatergoers and most of the city’s theater managers. The former thought he was adulterating high culture; the latter were convinced he was drawing away their customers. The authorities feared he was corrupting the moral standards of and encouraging political dissent among the workers. Au contraire, Bazas retorted. The astute businessman claimed he was raising standards, not lowering them, and he was making the workers happy. Bazas claimed to well understand what respectable working men and women enjoyed and, more important, what they aspired to. He was, in fact, one of them.
Figure 3. Exterior of the former Alcazar Theater, place Stalingrad, La Bastide, Bordeaux. (Photograph by author, 2014)

Martial Leglise grew up on the streets of early nineteenth-century Bordeaux. Either orphaned or abandoned when he was an infant and a self-confessed illiterate, he turned out to be an enterprising youngster. His working life began as a messenger boy for the company that operated stagecoaches—diligences, as they were called in French—between Bordeaux and the town of Bazas, upriver and inland about forty miles. Over time, he worked his way up to the position of driver. He became so well known along the route that people began to call him by the name of his daily destination. The job of driving a stagecoach provided him with opportunities to make money on the side. Remunerations for carrying messages or packages, both licit and illicit, and the odd job now and then led to new opportunities. Eventually, Bazas saved enough money to build and open the Alcazar Theater. Why this stagecoach driver felt competent to start a theater is inexplicable, but he seems to have known what he was doing. A good director of a theater, he wrote a few years later, had to have a good head for business and the energy to travel ceaselessly in search of talented performers.2
He also had to have trustworthy lieutenants to oversee the functioning of the theater on a day-to-day basis, fo handle the business operations and accounts, Bazas hired a man by the name of Monsieur Marville. Then he looked around for someone to oversee the singers, music, and actors, aboutwhich he admitted he knew little. Whomever he initially hired must have been up to the job, because the Alcazar was a success from the start. Over the next few decades, France’s best, most famous performers all trod the boards of Bazas’s theater. The impresario himself became a local celebrity, albeit a raffish one. According to the cultural newspaper Bordeaux-Artiste, the street urchin who, as we would say today, reinvented himself became one of the city’s best-loved characters.
Within a few years of the theater’s opening in the mid-i86os, Bazas lured Edmond Dédé away from the most prestigious theater in the city and appointed him the music director of the Alcazar Theater. Going to work for Bazas was a turning point in Dédé’s career. Over the course of his more than three decades in Bordeaux, Dédé tried to make a living catering to popular tastes for light songs, polkas, and waltzes and also to pursue his own ambition to compose music that met the more exacting standards of art music critics. Today, we would characterize his efforts as working both sides of the street: popular mu-	J
sic on one side and art (or, classical) music on the other. By the 1860s, that	-
street he had to cross was already wide and growing increasingly wider. The wider the gap grew between highbrow and lowbrow music, the more difficult it became for composers to bridge that gap. For a while, Edmond Dédé succeeded as well as and even better than most of his European peers.
Given a choice, Edmond Dédé would not have settled in Bordeaux. Although one of France's major cities, then and now, it lies near the southwestern Atlantic coast, too far from Paris to make an impression on the music world there. To attain musical celebrity in any genre, a musician had to be in the French capital, where the best schools, halls, critics, sheet music publishers, and musicians were. A job somewhere in northern France would have been preferable to one in Bordeaux. By the time he arrived in southwest France in i860, a new rail line had reduced travel time to the capital. But although it was certainly more comfortable than stagecoach, the train still took around forty-eight hours to reach Paris, stopping in Poitiers, Tours, and Orléans. Thus, he had to make the most of his first contract in Bordeaux, the one that prevented him from accepting a job offer in Rouen, less than a day’s journey from Paris. As consolation prizes go, however, the position as répétiteur (assistant conductor) of the ballet orchestra at the Grand Théâtre, one of the best provincial theaters in the country, was not a bad start for an up-and-coming composer.
Settling in another major river city was a mixed blessing for the ambitious composer. On the positive side, Bordeaux’s port, like New Orleans’s, served its prosperous middling and well-to-do mercantile families, whose fortunes were founded on transatlantic trade. And like the Crescent City, Bordeaux had a culturally diverse and economically variegated population. On the negative side, the prosperity of both cities derived directly and indirectly from the labor of enslaved men and women. New Orleans had been the chief slave emporium of the U.S. South; Bordeaux relied heavily on products produced by enslaved labor in the U.S. South and the French Caribbean colonies. The synergy between the positive and negative facets of Bordeaux's society fostered an urban culture that was as cosmopolitan as it was complicit in the worst aspects of the nineteenth-century global economy. A dark-skinned man of African descent like Dédé would have endured many affronts to his dignity in Bordeaux, just as he would have in his native city even after the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment in 1868 that abolished slavery. But in his native country, legal segregation and entrenched racism would have prevented him from pursuing his ambitions of becoming a successful and respected composer and conductor. In France, no law, no system of segregation prevented him from trying. Achieving his goals was an altogether different matter.
Dédé arrived in Bordeaux at a time when the city’s and the region’s economy were adjusting to shifts in transatlantic trading networks. In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, Bordeaux served as France’s main port of entry for sugar from French Caribbean colonies and the principal one for exports heading back to island markets. During the Napoleonic and Saint- Domingue wars, American and French merchants developed good relations as they worked together to minimize the risks they faced at a time when war imperiled seaborne traded Even after the loss of Saint-Domingue, two-thirds of the vessels leaving Bordeaux headed to the colonies in the Caribbean. Key colonial commodities—sugar, especially—fed local industries in the Aquitaine: sugar refineries, chocolate manufacturing, and the production of sea biscuits. But from 1815 on, Bordeaux’s sugar refineries fared increasingly poorly against British, Danish, and German competitors, and lost business to rivals in other French ports/ To compensate for their declining hold on the Caribbean sugar market, bordelais merchants improved trade relations with the United States. Cotton and tobacco from the southern states arrived on steamers from New York, where the majority of cotton brokerage firms were based. In return, bordelais merchants sold to the Americans their colonial commodities, such as tea, cacao, pepper, indigo, coffee, and sugar. Before 1862, trade with the United States had grown so important to the city that only the British had more steamers moored along the riverfront/
By 1862, when the blockade of southern U.S. ports began, Bordeaux’s economy was showing signs of slowing down. Although the city’s economy had been relatively immune from Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte’s coup d’état in 1851 and the economic slump that affected the rest of France, the business and elected leaders of the city government moved too slowly to modernize the river's port. To accommodate the growing number of steamships with deeper drafts, Bordeaux’s city industrialists funded the conversion of the sloping, muddy riverbanks, which suited the anchorage of the older, increasingly outmoded sailing vessels, into concrete vertical piers (fig. 4). But the pace of the conversion was too slow, and the city was soon unable to compete with Nantes and Le Havre in the north. For much of the 1860s, gangplanks continued to bridge the gap between the decks of ships and the riverfront. The reluctance of the city leaders to invest in the piers contributed to the collapse of the region’s naval construction industry, starting in 1865 and continuing into the next decade.6

Figure 4. The waterfront of Bordeaux with the vertical piers visible (Photograph by author, 2014)The U.S. Civil War initially made Bordeaux’s economic position worse. The flow of cotton and tobacco to France was cut off by the northern blockade of southern ports. Losing access to U.S. cotton damaged the bank accounts of French industrialists, which encouraged many of them, and some politicians (including the emperor), to favor the Confederates. But France’s official position of neutrality during the war obliged the industrialists to offer only covert support to the rebels. At the same time, forced to find new sources of raw materials, French textile manufacturers began to look toward the eastern Mediterranean and India. After the end of the American Civil War, only one in five vessels leaving Bordeaux set its course for the northern Western Hemisphere. The majority of them went to South America, northern Europe, west Africa, southeast Asia, and the Pacific. They went laden with bottles of wine and handcrafts and returned with raw commodities. Bordeaux’s economy no longer rested on textiles and shipbuilding; now viticulture, wine production, and handicrafts industries in the smaller provincial towns became the region’s healthiest sectors?
The reliance of Bordeaux and the region of Gascony on the fruits of slave labor, as well as its distance from the centers of political turmoil in the eighteenth and first half of the nineteenth centuries, reinforced a conservative strain in bordelais politics, economy, and culture. Going as far back as the French Revolution, the loose association of revolutionaries called the Girondists (hailing, as they did, from the Gironde, the department of which Bordeaux is the capital), met their end on the guillotine for not being revolutionary enough for the radicals. The subsequent revolutions of 1830 and 1848 made little impression on the city. The political programs of republicans and socialists resonated with few people, including workers in the port and shipyards of Bordeaux. When Napoléon III launched his empire, the city scarcely flinched.
That quiescence characterized the bordelais response to the events of the second half of the nineteenth century. During the Second Empire, the advocates of republicanism in Bordeaux went silent for fear of arrest and imprisonment. The major newspapers reflected the gamut of political opinion between monarchist and Catholic, on one side, and lukewarm supporters of the government, on the other. It seems fitting, then, to recall that Baron Haussmann not only served as the prefect of the Gironde but was born and raised there. The beige limestone regularity of the city’s facades made a lasting impression on the staid, cautious character of the “Attila of the Straight Line,” whose changes to the Paris landscape had much in common with the appearance of Bordeaux’s city center. Napoleon Ill’s downfall in 1871, followed by the establish- ment and suppression of the Paris Commune in the same year, and then the formation of the Third Republic were political events of enormous consequence for the nation as a whole, but the rough waters of political change in the capital did not reach as far as Bordeaux. The toppling of Napoleon Ill’s statue at his ouster in 1871 was the bordelaise citizenry’s most energetic response to events.
In this relatively placid river city, removed from the political center in many ways, Dédé established a career and a life that was also remote from the concerns of his family and friends in New Orleans. The outbreak of the Civil War and the capture and occupation of New Orleans by federal troops in 1862 slowed down contact between Americans in Europe and their families at home until 1865, when the war ended. Some of Dédé’s family and at least one of his friends joined the Union forces occupying New Orleans. When the occupying governor, Major General Benjamin F. Butler, created regiments for men of color, Dédé’s brothers, cousins, and his old friend Joseph Tinchant enlisted.8	}
News of the death of his grandmother, Maria Incamacion, the widow of Basile	°
senior, on Christmas Eve 1863 undoubtedly took longer to reach him than it would have before the war.s Within five years of that loss, Louise Dupré, the wife of Basile fils, died on April 1,1865, at the age of sixty-five, in the home she shared with her husband on the comer of St. Claude and Barrack Streets in Treme.10 Basile fils outlived his wife by only three years, dying at the age of sixty-four in the home of his son François, at 381 St. Ann Street in Treme, on February 28, 1868. The few instruments that formed his personal effects and the two pieces of real estate he owned brought the worth of his total assets to $4,273.40. Once his executors deducted his debts and their fees, each of the three natural sons of the late Basile fils inherited $300.”
His youth in Louisiana was behind him. For the first five years or so in Bordeaux, the Louisiana musician and composer, now in his thirties, had steady employment at the Grand Théâtre. People started paying attention to the newcomer soon after he started working in the prestigious theater that still stands where the cours de 1’Intendance meets the allée de Tourny. The position of répétiteur of the ballet entailed playing a ballet’s music on the piano during the dancers’ rehearsals. So positioned, he had the chance to compose his own ballet music and have it performed. The first piece of his to be produced at the Grand Théâtre was a one-act ballet, Nénéha, Queen of the Fairies, presented there in 1863. That ballet was the only one he received credit for, but at least one member of the public had the impression that he composed most of the music of the Grand Théâtre’s ballets, probably the one-act productions.12 Nénéha was judged a success, but one critic issued a caution: “Monsieur Dédé understands marvelously well the great art of orchestration; this young man possesses the least that is required, inspiration. Imagination grounded in training can perform miracles. We foresee great things for M. Dédé, but he must not indulge in excess. The queen of the fairies should not complain at length to the sound of a drum and a bass drum; she prefers melodies that take flight, the wisp of a breeze, a shimmering steam of silver.”^
This was not the last time a critic would express the wish that Dédé tone his music down. It is interesting that the critic touched on percussion, the very feature of the ballet that, had the music survived, might have allowed us to tie his music to his roots in Louisiana. Perhaps if he had stayed at the Grand Théâtre, he might have adjusted his compositions more to the tastes of the art music critics. However, he moved on. According to the profile of him in Bordeaux-Artiste from 1887-88, Dédé spent six years at the Grand Théâtre. This is difficult to credit. He is listed in the Bordeaux city directory as répétiteur of the Grand Théâtre in 1863 and 1864. Thereafter, his name does not reappear in the almanac until 1871, which suggests that 1865 is the year he went to work for the enterprising Bazas at the Alcazar Theater.^
He remained at the Alcazar Theater for a further five years. And then, in 1870, a tumultuous year in French history, he managed a small café-concert. After that, we lose sight of him until 1877, when he turns up as the composer of a well-received ballet at the Grand Théâtre. Throughout this period, he continued to work both sides of the street, composing two ballets for the more prestigious hall and one-act operettas for the cafés-concerts. By 1880 or 1881, he had moved to the Folies-Bordelaises, a big café-concert whose offerings shifted—some said declined—from extracts of opera to the popular precincts of vaudeville. The shift reflected the pressure on musicians and theater management to cater to the changing tastes of the broadest swathe of the public. As a consequence, the relentless commercialization of music increasingly forced musicians and composers to choose one side of the street or the other. On one side lay the elegant but highly competitive world of art music and on the other the brassy, lurid colors of the crowd. Dédé’s attempt to cross back and forth could not, in the long run, succeed, for reasons that had less to do with him and more to do with the changing market for popular music.
Of its kind, the Alcazar was the best theater in Bordeaux. Indeed, for a while it was the only one of its kind. By moving from the Grand Théâtre to the Alcazar, Dédé did more than change employers. He moved from a low-level job in a first-rate music hall to high-level position in a low-brow music hall, where light, accessible songs, one-act operettas and ballets, and excerpts from grand operas were the standard fare. His decision is not hard to understand. He needed the money, or, at any rate, he needed more of it than he could earn at the Grand Théâtre. If he had only himself to support, he likely would have stayed. But after the summer of 1864, he was no longer alone.
On June 18,1864, four or five years after settling in the city, the thirty-seven- year-old Edmond Dédé married twenty-nine-year-old Anne Catherine Antoinette Sylvia Leflet, a white Frenchwoman who, like a lot of working-class single women, was living in a rented furnished roomT The bridegroom brought along to the marriage ceremony four friends, three of whom were music teachers. His bride, Sylvie Leflet, as she was called, was born in Toulouse on October 7,1835, to unwed parents. At the time of her marriage to Edmond, her father, Antoine Leflet, a gardener, was living in Havana, Cuba, and her mother, Catherine Claverie, was deceased. Antoine Leflef s presence in the Western Hemisphere in 1864, recorded in the marriage record, tempts us to match the gardener from Toulouse with the French-born fifty-year-old laborer of the same name enumerated in the 1850 federal census in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana.16 It is a curious possibility that Dédé’s father-in-law was in the vicinity of New Orleans when the young composer returned from Mexico. Did they meet?
Aside from that possible coincidence, within four years or so of his arrival in Bordeaux Dédé had married a woman of illegitimate birth who claimed no profession. Although he, like Sylvie, was a natural child of unwed parents, he claimed for himself a more respectable past, insofar as he identified Basile and his wife, Louise, as his father and mother. This was not, as we know by now, the first time Dédé counted on the limits of communication technology to obscure details about his past. He asserted his respectability in a city whose inhabitants were more socially and religiously conservative than those in New Orleans. And now that he was changing jobs—moving from an art music venue to a less socially prestigious theater, he gathered all the respectability that he could muster out of his past. In 1864, the need for a larger salary must have made working for Bazas appealing. Three years after their marriage, his need for money grew more urgent when, on January 13,1867, Sylvie gave birth to a son, Eugène Arcade Dédé.17 Eugène was to be their only child.
The marriage between these two people of humble origins had special significance for Americans of both African and European descent who heard the news. A few months after the wedding, the New Orleans Tribune, a short-lived newspaper launched during the Civil War years by leaders of the local free community of color and associated with the Louisiana Republican Party, announced the nuptials, which were reported to have taken place in the Church of St. Dominic (now the Church of Notre-Dame).18 A year later, in 1865, one of the principal abolitionist newspapers in the United States, the National Anti-Slavery Standard, also reported Dédé’s marriage. That piece stressed that "Mr. Dede is a black man, as black as any one can be. Driven from his country by the stubbornness of prejudice, he went to France, and is now leader of an orchestra in one of the Bordeaux Theatres. His fame as an artist is European. He contracted matrimony, in legitimate bonds, before the Mayor of the Imperial city, with a young lady of accomplishment, belonging to one of the best families, and, of course, of Caucasian blood.”1®
For the white editors and the mainly white abolitionist readership, as well as for Dédé himself, the assumed gold standard of cultural achievement was measured in European currency. But the reference to Dédé’s dark complexion and Leflet’s “Caucasian blood” is more remarkable than it might first appear. In an age when many European Americans were moved to pity by images of seemingly “white” and light-skinned enslaved men, women, and children, but rejected the so-called “amalgamation of the races,” positive references to dark- skinned people of African descent marrying European women were exceedingly rare. To the overwhelming majority of white and black Americans, Edmond Dédé looked more like one of the masses of recently emancipated slaves, whose successful assimilation into free society was very much in doubt among white Americans, than the mostly mixed-race people who led the fight for equal rights. From the perspective of all Americans, Dédé was and would always be conspicuous for his darkness.
Meanwhile, while shouldering the ordinary burden of supporting a family, Dédé got on with his work. Whereas the ambience at the Grand Théâtre was rarified but cash poor, Bazas’s Alcazar Theater was of the people, for the people, and sustained by the people’s demand for drink and diversion. Bazas himself, in fact, had much to say in print about the difficulty of the business of running art music theaters and the low wages of musicians who worked in them. In 1863, when Dédé was still working at the Grand Théâtre, Bazas published a pamphlet in which he proposed solutions to what he, an outsider really, saw as the main problems faced by the managers of Bordeaux’s traditional theaters.20 In his view, the chief obstacles to turning a profit in theater were the lack of sufficient seating in the halls, the rising salaries of performing artists, and the government-imposed obligation on theater managers to mount four expensive productions in the summer season. These issues were close tothe hearts of all theater managers. But Bazas’s little pamphlet does not tell the whole story.
The gamut of theater and music halls in Bordeaux ranged from the prestigious halls like the Grand Théâtre to the lowly working-class cafés-chantants or cafés-concerts, many of which were little more than storefronts. When it was built in the 1780s, the Grand Théâtre could seat 1,750 people. Subsequent remodeling and restorations had reduced the number of seats to 1,150 by 1864. Fewer tickets meant higher prices and fewer ticket buyers. In his pamphlet, Bazas urged the municipal government to allow each of the larger theaters to install 300 additional seats. Ticket prices, he predicted, would go down, more people would buy them, and profits would go up.21 Only then would managers be in a position to confront the other problem he identified, the soaring fees demanded by the most sought-after performer.
According to his calculations, between 1858 and 1864, the fees demanded by singers more than doubled while the number of their performances fell.	>
Whereas in the past a singing star would agree to perform twenty-seven times	-
in a month and receive 700 to 800 francs in compensation, now singers mounted the stage only sixteen to eighteen times a month for fees ranging between 1,800 and 2,000 francs. Singers’ fees were the single most expensive item in a theater manager’s budget. Bazas rolled out the figures. The salaries paid to the stage manager (machiniste), painter, cashier, wardrobe supervisor, prop man, librarian (to keep track of all those libretti, scores, and sheet music), concierge, fireman, maintenance, and contrôleurs, not forgetting the 100 francs a night for the gas lighting and the obligatory contribution to the city’s poor relief fund, left barely 278 francs to pay the chorus, the musicians, and the dancers—at least fifty people in a theater like the Grand Théâtre. Songwriters and authors also demanded their share of a theater’s profit. Ever since the creation in 1851 of the Society of Authors, Composers, and Music Editors (Société des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs de musique, or SAGEM), theaters paid the organization fees for the use of songs and plays written by its members (Edmond Dédé became a member after he arrived in Bordeaux). It is hard to imagine that the management of the Grand Théâtre could afford to pay a living wage to a répétiteur like Edmond Dédé. Added to these fiscal burdens was the requirement that the Grand Théâtre, the Théâtre Français, and the other art music halls mount each summer, whether the demand was there or not, four major productions (troupes complètes): an opera, an operetta (or comic opera), a ballet, and a stage play. The costumes, scenery, and performers’ salaries were hugely expensive.
Although his own café-concert theater was exempt from these requirements, Bazas nonetheless had to pay for a similar battery of skilled workers and celebrated artists, gas to light the hall, and authors’ rights. In a real sense, as the owner-manager of Bordeaux’s biggest café-concert, Bazas had entered as an outsider into the debate about art music theaters and their regulation. The underlying and self-serving message he purveyed in his pamphlet was: “Don’t blame me for your lack of box-office receipts. Blame the government.”
It was true that his stage did not sag under the weight of four mounted full productions every summer, as the art music houses did. His theater was a top- of-the-line café-concert, where patrons entered for free, paid to drink, and stayed for the show. Until his theater opened, cafés-concerts in Bordeaux had been small, humble places, often little more than dingy comer bars where only the working poor were not ashamed to be seen. Now his café-concert was the first to take on airs. But he operated under an entirely different set of regulations from those imposed on the Grand Théâtre. Bazas came into the business at a moment when those restrictions were about to undergo reform, partly as a result of the resistance from him and other café-concert managers.
When cafés-concerts evolved from the open-air summer cafés on the Champs-Elysées and suburban goguettes to the large, ornate indoor winter theaters that stayed open all year, their managers faced a hostile environment more powerful than the one that Bazas encountered in his provincial city. Viewing the cafés-concerts as competition, the traditional theaters pressured the government to restrict what café-concert performers could and could not do, wear, and perform on stage. Before 1867, no scenery was allowed on the stage behind the performers. At most, potted plants adorned the singers’ back- drop. Cafés-concerts could not present plays or operas in their entirety. Singers were forbidden to wear anything other than formal evening wear for men and low-necked ball gowns and fancy hats for women. No costumes appropriate for the play or opera excerpts they performed were allowed. The singers had to make the most of the limited range of visual expression they were granted.
For the first fifteen years, café-concert shows followed a standard pattern of performance. The women singers, dressed to the nines, sat fanning themselves on chairs arranged in a semi-circle stretching across the stage, called the corbeille (basket). While the male singers stood behind them and awaited their turn, the women one by one rose, stepped to the footlights and sang and flirted (but not too much) with the men in the audience. Like earlier forms of singing cafés, when the singers took a break, they descended from the stage and wandered among the tables soliciting tips, a practice known as la quête (1quêter means “to beg”). Toward the end of the 1850s, the quête was replaced by contracts with café management for a predetermined fee and number of performances. And the corbeille was also disappearing around the same time that the café-concert star (la vedette) took center stage. The first such celebrity was a wildly popular singer, Thérésa, who began her career in the 1860s and lasted all the way into the early twentieth century, the dawn of the golden era of Josephine Baker and the Folies-Bergères.22
The practice of having all the performers seated on stage gave way in the 1860s to a succession of acts that were mostly songs and ballet and opera extracts. In Dédé’s first years at the Alcazar, over the course of an evening, quite a long list of performers moved on and off stage. To take a typical show, on July 27,1863, the public started arriving at the Alcazar around five o’clock in the late afternoon, when the orchestra opened the program with dance music, usually a quadrille, to enliven the mood. That piece was followed by a pas de deux from a ballet. A succession of three singers came on after that, followed by a couple who danced a polka on stage, two more singers, and a comic sketch. The first part of the program came to an end with the last pas de deux from a ballet. To begin the second part of the program, the orchestra played an overture. A soprano then performed an aria from an opera, followed by a trio of ballet dancers, a duet from an opera, a comic singer, another pas de deux, and, to conclude, a comic sketch. But the evening was not over. For the final segment of the evening, thé Alcazar offered what it called a “pantomime-parody-mythological burlesque,” entitled “Pygmalion et Galathea.” By the end of the six-hour show, twenty-seven performers in solos, pairs, and trios had taken part.23
Prospects for more varied programs improved when the director of theater administration (under the Prefecture of Police) in Paris loosened the regulations on March 31,1867. In a decree that applied to the provinces as well as to Paris, the government now permitted café-concert singers to wear costumes appropriate to the opera excerpts they performed.24 Café-concert managers had finally convinced the traditional theater managers—or the government— that they were not competitors. Bazas himself argued—with a large dose of self-interest—that his theater aided ticket sales at the Grand Théâtre by accul- turating the workers who attended his shows to appreciate serious opera and fine singing.23 Ignoring the question of whether they could afford the tickets to hear the music to which they had now been supposedly acculturated, he as much as claimed that he was performing an undervalued public service.
Bazas broadened the appeal of the café-concert beyond workers with shows of singers and dancers performing opera and light classical songs as well as more popular pieces. Many singers worked in both cafés-concerts and the more prestigious halls but assumed stage names when they appeared in the more down-market venues.26 Workers, students, office clerks, off-duty soldiers, and women indifferent to their reputations entered for free and stayed for as long as they could afford to pay for drinks. Over the course of the evening, they sipped their beverages, chatted with friends, and listened to singers and watched the dancers. This, in Bazas’s view, was adult education. Though he might have been sincere, the relaxation of the regulations seemed to be an implicit acknowledgment that the traditional theaters had little to lose. As the century progressed, cafés-concerts all over France, but especially in Paris and French provincial cities, started to become more like what Americans and the British would term vaudeville or music hall.
In the transition from café-concert to music hall, audiences still had tables on which to place their drinks while watching a show, the nature of which kept changing. The taxonomy of café-concert, music hall, and vaudeville grew ever more confused and conffising. Acrobats, gymnasts, folk dancers, child prodigies, and other acts were interspersed with the singers and ballet dancers. Later, in the late 1880s, off-shoots of the cafés-concerts, like the Moulin Rouge, which opened in Paris in 1889, provided space in front of the stage where customers could dance. In the music halls of Bordeaux, too, men and women danced the polka and the mazurka, or swayed in their seats to the overtures of Offenbach’s or Dédé’s operettas, and drank.
If the management and performers at the cafés-concerts gained respectability over time, in the front of the house, barely controlled anarchy reigned and was tempered only, if at all, by the presence of the police. These representatives of the state had as their first priority the suppression of political expression. Before the Second Empire, drinking establishments patronized by workers were the principal venues where political dissent was aired.2? Once Louis-Napoleon took power in 1851, political songs were banned altogether but especially in cafés-concerts. Flag-waving, patriotic jingoistic military music was approved, although, interestingly, singing the Marseillaise was not. Perhaps it was too evocative of political unrest for the government.
Only secondarily did the police presence discourage licentious or disruptive behavior. What the government wanted especially to avoid was the airing of criticism of its foreign policy, commentary on religious debates, and references to the French Revolution and its ideals.28 When late in his reign Napoléon III instituted liberal reforms, allowing some expressions of dissent in public, political songs on the stages of cafés-concerts continued to be prohibited, suchwas the power of satirical song. Only in the brief interlude of the Paris Commune of 1871 were songs satirizing foreign and domestic policy decisions allowed to be performed on stage. After 1871, the Third Republic again imposed censorship on performances in theaters and cafés-concerts?9 Freedom of expression remained thwarted for most of the nineteenth century.
On the national, Parisian, and provincial levels, the Ministry of the Interior exerted its authority over cafés-concerts principally by two means: censorship and repression?0 Those two approaches were buttressed by reports from informants and commentary in the press. Whether in Paris or on a local level, the prefect of the police required theater managers to get approval of all singers they hired and all songs and texts to be performed in their theaters. Each time the prefect of the police in Bordeaux granted permission to a theater manager to hire a singer, he reiterated in his letter of approval the regulations under which the theater had to operate: theaters could present no more than one act from any play or opera once in an evening, and no more than three of four persons were to perform in it.
Repression of political content meant surveillance, which seems to have been as effective in maintaining order as surveillance at the borders was in monitoring the movement of migrants. Which is to say, it was not very effective. A policeman had to be present at all performances to ensure that political malcontents and seditious material were not slipped into the program. Efforts to blacklist certain performers were evaded by the relatively widespread use of stage names. Maintaining order in theaters was equally a chimera. As a fallback, the state relied on an informal network of informants, similar to the way illegal migrants were or were not tracked down?1 Police records in Bordeaux contain anonymous letters from police spies—the dreaded mouches—and outraged busybodies. Sometimes the most reliable reports were those the police authorities read in the newspapers.
That the efforts of the police to regulate and monitor the cafés-concerts often failed, at least in terms of maintaining public order, newspaper coverage makes abundantly clear. Reports of incidents in theaters are nearly as common as critiques of the performances on stage. The presence of the police did not dampen the ardor of theatergoers, who were not shy in expressing their opinions of performances. If the first singer on the bill happened to be a novice—a placard reading “Audition” signaled to the audience a singer’s debut—she or he suffered the hoots and catcalls of a raucous audience?2 All singers had to contend with spontaneous audience sing-alongs, less than charitably referred to as “bellowing” (beugler) by those who sneered at the cafés-concerts?3 Indeed,as was true in Paris, the majority of the clientele of the caf’-conc’s, as they were called in slang, came from the humble strata of bordelais society, but café management set aside tables for better-off patrons who were prepared to pay for champagne and exclusivity.54 Risqué material was forbidden, yet it was a stretch to depict a theater like the Alcazar as family-friendly, as Bazas did. An advertising leaflet for the Alcazar Theater in the 1860s shows a mother and father standing with their children in the interior of the theater while a show goes on in the background (fig. 5). But the bourgeois respectability Bazas and other café-concert managers claimed for themselves could not change the fact that the typical atmosphere in a café-concert remained raffish, bohemian, and not quite respectable.

Figure 5. The interior of the Alcazar Theater. (By permission of Archives municipales de Bordeaux, Théâtres)Political censorship was a process that Edmond Dédé, as a novice manager of a café-concert, had to negotiate. In 1870, he assumed the direction of the Café Delta, a small café-concert at 16 rue Voltaire, off the cours de 1'Intendance. The Café Delta was likely another undertaking of Bazas’s, and he put it in the hands of his employee, whom he had hired away from the Grand Théâtre around 1865. The Bordeaux city directories list Dédé as the Delta’s manager for 1871 and 1872.35 While he ran the Delta, some of the greatest stars of the café-concert circuit throughout France stepped on to this stage Accounts differ as to how long the café-concert lasted, but the most reliable of them claims that it lasted until 1877.36 Dédé was there at its opening as the manager, but it is less clear that he stayed until it closed.
A more interesting question, however, is whether he had anything to do with the cafe's name. What did “Delta” refer to? Within the context of bordelais society, it had no apparent significance. Bordeaux could not be called a delta river port. New Orleans, in contrast, could. It is an intriguing notion that Dédé, if he had a hand in naming the café-concert, might have been paying tribute to the Mississippi delta, future home of the blues.
Putting together a timeline of Dédé’s movements based on the sketchy dates provided by the profiles in L’Artiste, de Bordeaux and Bordeaux-Artiste is difficult. Of the two profiles, the later one, from 1887-88, contains more details. It starts with his birth in New Orleans and moves on to his emigration to France, his studies in Paris, and the intricacies of his employment history leading to Bordeaux. At least a third of the article recounts Bazas’s story. Once the narrative reaches Dédé’s move to the Alcazar in 1865, the dates begin to deviate from dates documented elsewhere. Since Dédé was undoubtedly the source of the narrative, it is his version of his past. The author of the profile claims that Dédé was “an assiduous and devoted collaboration of Bazas” for over ten years.
But the year 1870 with its turmoil led to the closing of the Delta. The moment for the brassy sound of the café-concert had passed. When his café closed he had to accept a job as a violin-soloist at the Grand Théâtre in Algiers. Some years later, he picked up his bow again with the same determination he had shown in the past. This time, his sojourn was temporary and the following year he went to fight the battle at the Casino of Marseille. But he soon returned here [Bordeaux] and after spending 1880 at the Alcazar, he was engaged by M. Verdier of the Folies- Bordelaises, where he remains to this day.As he had when he went to Mexico City in 1848, Dédé again availed himself of an imperial opportunity.*7 Except in this instance, the port city of Algiers, on the southern coast of the Mediterranean Sea, had a more promising job market for a musician like Dédé than what Mexico City offered nearly twenty years before. Over the decades since its conquest by France in 1830, Algeria had received a large influx of Europeans. With the encouragement of the French government, working-class immigrants from all over Europe went in search of work and settled there, like the Americans who went to Mexico in 1848. The number of European settlers in Algeria rose from 131,000 in 1851 to 230,000 in 1871, around the time that Dédé left Bordeaux.}8
He arrived there in the early 1870s, in the aftermath of a series of environmental disasters and periods of famine. The political climate was unstable, especially during the transition from the Second Empire to the Third Republic. During the Second Empire, the divergent interests of the French government, the permanent settlers, or colons as they were called, and the indigenous Muslim population created friction. Napoleon Ill’s imperial government hoped to avoid alienating the indigenous Muslim landowners of Algeria by granting them a limited form of property law, but the settlers had no interest in making such accommodations. They wanted to be in charge, to the extent that they wanted to fully incorporate Algeria into France, fully endowed with French law. To them, the indigenous Muslim population were irrelevant, except insofar as they were workers for the Europeans. The Muslim landowners might have resigned themselves to French colonial rule if they had been allowed to exercise even in a limited way their own form of property rights, but the European settlers fought vigorously against their participation in the government.^ These tensions led to an insurrection in 1871 by the Muslim population against the government and the settlers that was quickly suppressed.
Well-to-do Europeans went to Algiers and elsewhere in Algeria for the resorts, the thermal baths, and the allure of a familiar French culture superimposed on a locale perceived as exotic. They found there a well-established European music culture. Five or so years before Dédé arrived, the composer Salvador Daniel, son of a Spanish refugee to France, ended a decadelong sojourn in Algiers, where he taught music, studied indigenous music, and composed his own pieces. He acquired enough of a reputation that he met Napoleon III on more than one occasion. It is unlikely that Edmond Dédé met him as their time as students at the Conservatory in Paris did not overlap. Daniel returned to Paris in 1866 and subsequently accepted the position of director of the Conservatory during the Paris Commune in 1871. Along with thousands of others, he was executed during the week the Commune fell and the Third Republic was born. Not long after Dédé arrived in north Africa, another composer, Camille Saint-Saëns, first visited Algiers; he returned there annually for the next eighteen years.40 Dédé’s decision to go to Algiers to look for work is therefore not surprising.
Unfortunately, nothing is known about Dédé’s time in Algiers. Nor does any trace of his subsequent stint at the Casino in Marseille survive. However, we do know that Dédé and his wife Sylvie obtained passports in 1871, declaring Lisbon as their destination.41 In fact, they were probably on their way to Algiers. After that date, Dédé disappears from view until we find him back in the conductor’s chair at the Alcazar Theater in 1877. Three years after that, he made his last move, to the Folies-Bordelaises, where he worked as one of two orchestra conductors until 1889.
Dédé’s move to the Folies-Bordelaises around 1880 appears to have been a step down in prestige, but it is hard to be sure. On the one hand, the Folies- Bordelaises was one of the most popular theaters in the city. On the other, it was even further removed from the world of the Grand Théâtre, where he wanted to be. Certainly, the Folies-Bordelaises lacked the ambience of the Grand Théâtre. Indeed, the singers, the conductor, the management, and the ever-present policemen fought a losing battle to impose even a slight sense of decorum on the proceedings at the Folies. Despite the presence of policemen, the theater’s clientele occasionally took control of performances, much to the annoyance of the music director. Nightly battles with an unruly bordelais crowd took a greater toll on the conductors than the strain of living under political censure in the Third Republic, as made clear by an account, published in one of the major newspapers in 1884, of an altercation during a performance at the Folies-Bordelaises.
In the second half of the show, the baritone finished singing and was called back for an encore. He returned to sing the last couplet. The audience, who wanted him to sing something new, applauded again to make him return.
Instead of the baritone, a female singer appeared. The audience energetically renewed their call for the baritone. Cries, hoots, whistles, and the stamping of walking sticks drowned out the woman’s voice and the brass of the orchestra. The deafening noise continued until the singer left the stage.
Once she was off, the baritone stepped forward and announced that as soon as the last note of the program had sounded, he would accede to the wishes of those in attendance.Satisfied, the audience applauded, but the conductor was not pleased. He expressed his displeasure aloud in disagreeable terms. He then admonished the audience and even threatened them.
The performance continued peacefully enough. Then the curtain fell before the baritone reappeared. But before it fell completely the conductor began playing the exit music.
New and not less lively protestations from the audience demanded that he keep his promise. The curtain went back up. The musicians continued to play the retreat. The acclaimed artist appeared finally, and the conductor, now very angry, abandoned the podium and disappeared.
The performance went on and ended without fuss.
The attitude assumed by the conductor in this incident is entirely at fault, and it was severely criticized by the audience members on their way out.42
Such were the occupational hazards of a musician who took his work seriously. And in this instance Edmond Dédé, one of the theater’s two conductors, may have been the one taking umbrage at the audience’s interference with the performance.
The Folies-Bordelaises had an ambiguous reputation among the cafés- concerts in the city. The best that newspaper reviewers could say was that the theater manager, Fernand Bory, really knew how to show the public a good time. But on the margins of the theater, particularly at the entrance on the busy thoroughfare, rue Sainte Catherine, chaos threatened. Anonymous letters from people living in the vicinity of the theater appear in police files. They contain complaints about prostitutes working the crowd at the Folies- Bordelaises in the 1870s. The police clipped from local newspapers letters to the editor calling for more police effort to clear the street of the women whose disorderly conduct at the theater’s entrance disrupted the entire neighborhood. One clipping consisted of a newspaper editorial: “There, the courtesan and the streetwalker openly engage in the shameful come-ons that their less well tricked-out comrades practice on the rue Dauphine and the cours d'Albret.” The complaint, the editors wanted to make clear, was not directed at the management of the Folies-Bordelaises; rather it pointed to the confusing and overlapping jurisdictions of the theater police, the morals police, and drinking establishments police—none of whom had authority over the space outside the theater where the offensive behavior was taking placed Still, no one thought the Folies-Bordelaises was a wholesome place.
The year 1870 was a watershed for Dédé, for reasons having to do with his compositions and the changes in popular demand for certain kinds of music. During the 1860s and 1870s, he composed most of the pieces that made contemporary musicologists take note of him. He drew praise for La Sensitive, a two-act ballet, which debuted at the Grand Théâtre in late April 1877, while he was conducting at the Alcazar Theater.44 Judging by the names he gave to the characters in the ballet, the now-lost plot resembled that of Giuseppe Verdi's grand opera set in ancient Egypt, Aida (1871). The principal ballerinas’ roles were called “Naïda,” “Néméa,” “Demona,” "Ophelia," and “Krydja,” all but the last derivative of Verdi or Shakespeare. The corps was rounded out by two high priests and an Indian. Reviewing the ballet, Anatole Loquin, a critic and editor of a short-lived monthly music journal La musique à Bordeaux, wrote, “There are some pretty motifs in the occasionally rather loud [brayante] music of the head conductor of the orchestra at the Alcazar Theater."4^ Loquin’s condescension suggests that it was by then unusual for a professional musician to produce pieces for both the cafés-concerts and an art music hall like the Grand Théâtre.
Most of the titles of Dédé’s works that survive from this period were typical of songs and music heard in venues like the Alcazar and the Folies-Bordelaises rather than the Grand Théâtre. Lester Sullivan, the scholar who has produced the most accurate summary of Dédé’s biographical details, counted over 250 dances, songs, ballet music, and orchestral works written during his exile in France. Between 1865 and 1881, Dédé and the lyricists with whom he worked published their songs in Bordeaux.46 From 1880 on, however, Dédé had most of his songs published in the urban market that mattered most to him, Paris. He was aiming at two different geographic markets simultaneously as the printed inscriptions on the sheet music make clear. To take one example, the cover of the sheet music for “My Handsome Tyrolian” (1876) bears the inscription, “Dedicated to Madame Maria Rivière of the Eldorado; sung by Mlle Marquet at the Alcazar.” The Eldorado was one of the largest and most popular cafés- concerts in Paris, but Mademoiselle Marquet toured the country and performed at Bourdeaux cafés-concerts like the Alcazar. Other examples of his surviving sheet music contain dedications to theater managers and performers based in Pans and also to colleagues in the business both in Bordeaux and in Paris. Dédé, then, was intending to bring his songs to the Parisian market as early as 1880.
Despite his productivity and the occasional reviews of his work in the bordelais press, his celebrity in Bordeaux’s art music circles faded as the years passed. The critic Anatole Loquin pointed to the inclusion of Dédé and twoother Bordeaux composers in the 1878 edition of Fétis's Biographie universelle des musiciens (referred to informally as “Fétis,” it is the nineteenth-century French equivalent to Grove’s Dictionary of Music and Musicians) as evidence of the editor’s comprehensiveness, the implication being that Dédé was not well known in art music circles.47
If Dédé had become relatively unknown in Bordeaux by 1878, he moved deeper into obscurity in the following decade. A list of his major compositions printed in an 1886 issue of The Minstrel, a periodical published in Bordeaux, differs from that in the 1878 edition of Fétis only in the addition of his four-act opera. As the writer in The Minstrel put it, "Monsieur Edmond Dédé, whose name and talent are utterly unknown in Paris, is a Negro [nègre] artiste, who has made something of himself in Bordeaux over twenty years and has a certain reputation as a composer and orchestra leader.”48 As will be made clear further on, to be called a “Negro” had more negative connotations than the rendering of the word into English conveys.
Elis reputation in Bordeaux suffered from his attempt to compose both art music and popular music. Even while he worked for Bazas in the 1860s and most of the 1870s, and then after he moved to the Folies-Bordelaises, he composed orchestral pieces, of which “Mephisto masque” (1889) and “Rêverie champêtre” (1891, a fantasy for violin and cello or flute and bassoon) are two examples that survive. In Fétis, Dédé’s entry lists only two ballets, Nénéha (1862) and La Sensitive (1877), both produced at the Grand Théâtre.4?
During his time at the Alcazar and the Folies-Bordelaises, Dédé also composed several comic operettas. Many of them conformed to the regulations for cafés-concerts in that they were one-act productions and quite fantastical. In 1877, the Alcazar Theater produced two of them, Il faut passer le pont and Le voisin de Thérèse, each one having a run of a week to ten days. In the following year, Dédé s one-act operetta Chik-Kang-Fô, described as a chinoiserie musical, had nine performances at the Alcazar. The comic potential of this orientalist parody, which predated Gilbert and Sullivan’s Mikado by less than a decade, is suggested in the singers’ characters. The caricatural Chinese names Dédé gave his characters—“Fo-li-chon,” “The Executor,” “Pépita the Phyloxereuse” (undoubtedly an evil character; an infestation of phylloxera was killing the grape stock in the Aquitaine between 1875 and 1892), “Ka-Ko-Fé,” “Kok-Ké,” “Ka-Ko-Li, and a band of female singers, the “Kè-Ka-Ka-Ka-Fè-Ko”—suggest just how silly the production was meant to be.5°
As a rule, Dédé left the lyrics to someone else. His usual collaborators were his colleagues in the theaters where he worked. None of them gained a lasting reputation. There is one surviving song, however, whose lyrics and music were likely composed by Dédé. “Bikina" is described as “health advice” (conseil hygiénique) on the cover of the sheet music.5' The illustration shows a young bordelais swell, or gommeux, dressed in a tight-waist jacket, trousers flared at the bottom, vest, bow tie, and high winged collar. His hat rests jauntily on the back of his head. In his left hand he holds a bottle labeled “Bikina.” With the other he points to a poster advertising the drink. Over his shoulder in the background appears the faint interior of a café-concert with a man in a top hat seated at a table, a woman standing beside him, and what looks like a waiter holding a bottle (of Bikina, presumably). An inscription under the title, “Donné par Callen aux Folies-Bordelaises,” indicates that it was performed by a singer named Callen where Dédé was working (fig. 6). The lyrics explain that the qualities of “Bikina” will not get you as drunk as absinthe will. The cover illustration and the lyrics make it clear that Dédé had composed a commercial jingle to be performed during a Folies-Bordelaises show.
The sheet music of “Bikina” is interesting both for what it reveals about the trajectory of Dédé’s career and for the lyricist named on the cover. The year 1881 coincides with the period when he began to have his songs published in Paris, although this one was published in Bordeaux. Nevertheless, Dédé’s compositions were taking an increasingly commercial turn. Paris was not only where the music of greatest prestige was performed, it was also thé capital of the commercial music market. The intense commodification of music— tickets sales, sheet music sales—from the middle of the nineteenth century into the twentieth erected a fence between art music and popular music, patrolled by critics and the wealthy. In the music business, fueled by the desire to increase profits, many composers, musicians, theater managers, and publishers were willing to be led by, rather than lead, public opinion when they made creative or artistic choices. Those musicians who refused to capitulate to public tastes faced the uphill challenge of either finding a patron who would support them in their noble, artistic endeavors (think Richard Wagner and Ludwig II of Bavaria) or occasionally giving in to market demands in order to survive (think Jacques Offenbach). Each musician's goal was to capitulate as seldom as possible, but very few composers and virtuosi were lucky enough to avoid playing or composing for the commercial market in popular music.52
Edmond Dédé did not capitulate so much as he was ineluctably drawn into the powerful undertow of the popular music market. He pivoted toward the sectors of the music world that best compensated him financially, even though he never lost sight of his original ambition, which was to be recognized for his


W55&
Figure 6. Sheet music cover, “Bikina,” 1881, by Edmond Dédé. (By permission of Bibliothèque nationale de France, Département de musique) opera and symphonie pieces. With the success of his ballet, La Sensitive, behind him, Dédé, now in his fifties, began to plan a two-pronged approach to the music world beyond Bordeaux, specifically in Paris. His initial portal was through the Paris song market. His songs, ballets, and orchestral pieces appear to be the markers Dédé was staking along a road leading back to the capital, where he hoped to have a grand opera produced. He had already composed a prodigious amount of music, thereby achieving far more than he ever could have back in the United States. He chose to pursue a career in a popular genre so that he would not have to endure the poverty incumbent on musicians devoted exclusively to their “art.”
This strategy cannot have been an easy one. A reflection of that effort may be hidden in the name of the lyricist of “Bikina.” On the cover of the sheet music, Dédé is named as the composer; tire lyrics are attributed to “Quasimodo.” “Quasimodo,” however, is likely to be Dédé in disguise. “Bikina” is the only one of his songs whose lyricist uses a pseudonym. Quasimodo, the main character in Victor Hugo’s novel Nôtre Dame de Paris (1831), translated into English as The Hunchback of Notre Dame, is a hunchback with a facial disfigurement, whose occupation as bell-ringer of Notre-Dame has made him deaf. Dédé has a previous association with the name. In the 1860s, he entitled a symphony “The Quasimodo Symphony.” Did his use of the name conceal his feelings about his place in French society? Coupled with the likelihood that Dédé composed the “Bikina” lyrics under the name “Quasimodo,” it seems plausible that he was expressing, ironically or plaintively, a sense of how he felt in his adopted country.
If the songs were Dédé’s ticket back to Paris, the staging of his opera would redeem the fare he paid to get there. But the timing of his move to Paris at the end of the 1880s indicates that, in the end, it was a retrenchment. It is hardly surprising that Dédé composed a grand opera. That genre potentially garnered the greatest prestige.” Unfortunately, the opera went missing for the last decade of the nineteenth and for all of the twentieth century. Happily, in 2010 it turned up in Harvard University’s Houghton Library, among a collection of nineteenthcentury opera scores purchased by the library from a collector in Paris.54
The handwritten score of Dédé’s four-act opera, Morgiane, ou, Le sultan d’lspahan, is divided between two bound manuscripts, with acts 1 and 2 in one volume and acts 3 and 4 in another. Three different copyists were involved in their production. One scribe entered the notation and instrumentation. Either the librettist, Louis Brunet, or another scribe filled in the libretto. The third hand belongs to Edmond Dédé, who extensively edited, crossed out entire pages, glued new insertions on top of superseded sections of the score, and entered his own conductor’s notes in his distinctive script, including in blue pencil. This manuscript is the earliest complete opera score by an African American composer and for that reason alone is worthy of further attention.
A close examination of the title page suggests a rethinking on the composer’s part. In a bold, firm hand, the professional scribe had written in the center of the page, “Le Sultan d’Ispahan Opéra en 4 Actes. Paroles de: Louis Brunet. Musique de: Edmond Dédé.” But Dédé wrote above the title, at a slightly haphazard angle, the supertitle, “Morgiane,” the year of composition, “1887,” and place of composition, Bordeaux. This suggests that in 1887, while still living in Bordeaux, Dédé decided rather late in the compositional process that the thematic heart of his one opera lay in the character of Morgiane and not in that of the Sultan of Ispahan. The extent to which Dédé had control over the text is uncertain, but the number of amendments in his hand suggests that he considered it his work. The librettist, Louis Brunet, was the editor of Le Nouvelliste, one of Bordeaux’s minor newspapers.55
In most respects, the opera’s plot is entirely conventional for the nineteenth century. It requires as much suspension of credulity as any other grand opera of the period. Set during an undisclosed period in Ispahan (modern Iran’s Isafan), the Safavid capital of the Persian empire, Morgiane, or, the Sultan of Ispahan opens during the wedding of a young couple, Amine and Ali. Amine's father, Hagi Hassan, reveals to the couple a long-held secret. Long ago, while returning from Mecca, he encountered a beautiful woman, Morgiane, who was fleeing a detested husband, holding a newborn infant in her arms. Hassan carried her and her baby off to a new life.
Amine understands immediately that she is the infant Morgiane carried. Who, then, she implores her mother, is her father, if not Hassan? Morgiane promises to tell her one day. Amine asks her new husband, Ali, whether he now regrets their marriage. But Ali replies that as an orphan, he has no greater claim to honor than she. They swear fidelity to each other. Suddenly, Beher, the sultan of Ispahan’s henchman, enters to claim Amine for the sultan. In vain, the family resists. Beher drags Amine away while Ali and Hassan curse the sultan and swear revenge.
Act 2 brings the protagonists to Ispahan, where they will attempt a rescue of Amine. 1 rassan, Ali, and Morgiane witness the arrival in Ispahan of Beher and his troop with Amine in tow. Her distraught parents and husband plot to gain an audience with the sultan in order to assassinate him. In act 3, the sultan of Ispahan, Kourouscha, is in a courtyard of his palace, where he laments that his love for Amine has made him feel powerless. In the scene’s prologue,the chorus furnishes the information that the sultan has long been a widower. When Amine is brought before the sultan, she declares her fidelity to her husband. In turn, the sultan swears she will become his sultane that same day.
To the sounds of martial music, the coronation of Amine begins with a ballet, which we would expect from a composer who worked as the Grand Theatre's ballet répétiteur. A trio of Arabian singers arrive, who soon reveal themselves to be Ali, Hassan, and Morgiane in disguise. Ali declares that he will foretell the sultan’s future in song. The sultan demurs, having no desire to learn his fate on the day when his new sultane is to be crowned. Ali persists in singing a parable about a Judean shepherd who loved nothing in life so much as his little white lamb, whose beauty made everyone who saw the lamb desire her. The shepherd's lamb is kidnapped, provoking him to swear vengeance. The story very quickly deteriorates into a declaration of Ali’s own revenge on the sultan. Within a few measures, Ali, Hassan, and Morgiane are led off to the sultan’s dungeon.
The denouement of act 4, as any opera lover in the twenty-first century will have guessed by now, occurs when Morgiane confesses at the moment they are all about to be killed that the sultan has fallen in love with his own daughter. The sultan forgives Ali and Amine, Ali forgives the sultan, and, although at first Amine understandably resists embracing her biological father, Ali convinces her to forgive him. Morgiane and Hassan are relegated to the sidelines of the stage and the plot as the curtain descends on a scene of filial mercy.
The contrived plot and the moralizing of Dédé’s Morgiane would have appeared hackneyed and outdated to some contemporaries. In 1870, seventeen years before Dédé put the final touches on his opera, Wagner’s hero Siegfried first “passionately embraced” his twin sister, Sieglinde, in the premiere of Die Walkerie and thus destroyed what little was left of opera’s innocence. Jacques Offenbach’s cynical Tales of Hoffmann premiered in Paris eleven years later in 1881. Like other opera composers of the time, Dédé very likely was going for the big effect by setting the plot of his opera in the Persian empire. Giuseppe Verdi’s Nabucco (1841) and Aida (1871), Georges Bizet’s The Pearl Fishers (1863), and, several decades later, Giacomo Puccini’s Turandot (1924) offered audiences colorful and splendid spectacles on stage. In his case, however, Dédé had internalized the same kind of essentializing stereotypes that white Europeans projected on to people who looked like him, whom they classified as “exotic.” For this reason, until we know more about the opera and how it sounded, we do not have to read too deeply into opera’s setting and lyrics to see how invested he was in common orientalist stereotypes and tropes.56He had been internalizing “exotic” tropes for years by the time he finished his opera. The exotic Orient was not a new genre for Dédé. He had set the operettas he composed for the Folies-Bordelaises in settings—like China—that were considered exotic. Lester Sullivan has speculated that Dédé might have decided on the setting after the season he worked in Algiers, but Dédé was just as likely to have settled upon such a theme without having left France.57 Yet the time spent in Algiers may account for the specificity of certain details, in particular, Hassan’s honorific “Hagi” to indicate his fulfillment of the Hajj; the use of “Allah” to refer to God; and the sultan's name, Kourouschah, which contains the word “shah,” the highest title of the rulers of the Persian empire.
The arresting element of the story concerns the use of white imagery. Several times in his text, the librettist Brunet deploys the color white to signify beauty and purity. When Hassan recalls discovering the distraught refugee mother, he describes Morgiane cradling her infant “in her arms that are whiter than alabaster.” Ali’s parable of the simple shepherd describes his beloved pet as “the whitest of lambs.” And at the end of act 4, after Morgiane has informed Kourouschah that he is about to take his own daughter as his bride, the sultan asks pardon of Amine:
That my impure breath on your face
would mar its color, whiter than a lily,
pardon me, my remorse is sincere, pardon me, dear child, sweet treasure.
Come to my arms and embrace your father
Come embrace him, if he is still worthy.58
The association of the color white with innocence and purity was the stock-in-trade of poets, lyricists, songwriters, authors, and just about every member of Western societies that viewed and still views a universal moral order in terms of black and white. Edmond Dédé was no exception. He was a professional musician and showman who knew how to communicate with his public. The cost to his amour propre employing such imagery can only be imagined. For a black man to deploy such imagery was tantamount to inflicting on himself little nicks similar to those that he felt every time he read or heard a disparaging comment about black skin. One, two, three nicks are not particularly painful. But a lifetime of steady nicks, some big, some small, leads to open wounds that never heal.
Contemporary accounts suggest that a full production of Edmond Dédé’s opera was never mounted on stage in either Bordeaux or Paris. In 1886, a year before the date on the title page in the Houghton Library manuscript, the cultural magazine the Minstrel reported that “a colleague of ours informs us that a grand opera in four acts, the ‘Sultan of Ispahan,’ has just been submitted for the appreciation of M. Graviere, director of the Grand Théâtre of Bordeaux. ”5? Over a year later, the opera had still not been presented there. The author of the profile of Dédé in Bordeaux-Artiste in 1888 chose his words carefully when he wrote, “Some time ago, the maestro has had accepted at the Grand Théâtre an opera in four acts, entitled Le sultan dTspanhan [sic], which awaits only the chance to face the footlights and make the scimitars of his oriental characters shine.”60 Evidently, the management chose not to produce the opera at the theater. It does not appear on the list of productions. Unable to find a producer for the production, Dédé and his wife moved to Paris around 1889. But he had no better luck in the French capital.61
We know relatively little about what Dédé’s music sounded like. Only twice has his music been recorded. In 2000, the classical music label Naxos released on compact disc Edmond Dédé: Mon Pauvre Coeur, a selection of his songs and orchestral works recorded by the Hot Springs Music Festival Symphony Orchestra under the direction of Richard Rosenberg. With the exception of the title track, “Mon pauvre coeur,” published in New Orleans prior to his departure for France in 1855, the compositions include several of the many comic and military songs that Dédé wrote for the theaters where he' worked, such as “Fight in the Fields,” “Cora, the Girl from Bordeaux,” and “My Corporal!” Also included in the recording are the overture, rondeau, duet, and finale of a saynète (a short operetta) called Françoise et Tortillard. The only other recording of a composition by Dédé was released in 2005, Tum-of-the-Century Comet Favorites, among which figures Dédé’s polka for orchestra, “Mephisto masqué,” also included in the Naxos recording. Given Dédé’s productivity, these nineteen or so recorded pieces offer merely a hint of his talent.62
Only two photographs of Edmond Dédé are known to have survived. They accompany the profiles of him in L’Artiste de Bordeaux and Bordeaux-Artiste. The earlier issue lacks a date, so it takes a little cross-checking to calculate when it appeared. The list of his compositions whose dates we know, like Chik-Kang-Fô (1878), allow us to date the piece and the photograph to 1878 at the earliest but not later than 1882. In this first profile, Dédé’s orchestral works, ballet music, and operettas are placed in the foreground. His popular songs come in for mention only at the end: “Let us add to these principal works one hundred and fifty ballet pieces in all genres, numerous fantasies,ninety-five songs, for the most part published in Paris and Bordeaux” (emphasis in the original). The writer stresses his work ethic: “Dédé’s passion for his art is well known. Not a day goes by without his composing a page or two. Composition is, for him, a vital necessity. Thanks to his excellent foundation, serious music studies, and also an astonishing talent, Edmond Dédé deserves to be considered a composer of true merit.” The profile bears all the hallmarks of a self-promoting job application, which it probably was, in spite of its being signed “Aristée.”63 It seems clear, in any case, from the inclusion of works premiered at his second stint at the Alcazar and the absence of references to the Folies-Bordelaises that he was, at the time of the issue’s publication, either looking for work or looking to change jobs.
Nowhere in the first profile does the writer mention that Edmond Dédé is a man of African descent. It was not necessary; the photograph made it apparent (fig. 7). In the now damaged, only surviving copy of the newspaper, the photograph reveals a solid, full-fleshed, dark-skinned man with his hair parted down the center, seated in three-quarter pose. His gaze is directed over his shoulder to his left and slightly downward. He is bundled up in clothing: a buttoned wool jacket, a loose Ascot tie held down with a tie pin, the pointed tips of a white collar obtruding from the jacket’s neckline, and a heavier coat draped over his shoulders. Dédé’s face bears a proud, even haughty expression, so much so that it is hard to believe he is the same man who “Aristée” claims made many dancers “jiggle under the influence of his diabolical quadrilles!” Without reading too much more into the image, Dédé certainly looks the part of a serious, art music composer.
The second photograph accompanies the later and longer profile, this one unsigned and published in Bordeaux-Artiste at some point in either 1887 or 1888 (fig. 8).s4 Even a cursory comparison of the two photographs will convince a skeptical viewer that Dédé’s fortunes had changed in the intervening years. Wearing an ordinary jacket with a narrow, smooth velvet collar, a tie held in place by a tie pin under a stiff, detachable band collar, he sits not quite facing the camera, with his shoulders slumped, gazing in the distance to his left. What looks like the chain of a fob watch, with a small ornament attached, hangs at a buttonhole in the vest under his jacket. A folded handkerchief stands erect out of the jacket front pocket. His natural, untreated hair is no longer divided as it was in the earlier photograph. The composer looks older, more care-worn, a slight furrow in his brow. He has the look of a man who has encountered disappointment.
Some of that disappointment must have involved the uncertain fate of his opera, but attitudes like the one expressed at the beginning of the profile also
Figure 7. Earliest known photograph of Edmond Dédé, appearing in LArtiste de Bordeaux, c. late 1870s or early 1880s. (By permission of the Amistad
Research Center, Tulane University)

had an impact. Whereas the earlier profile, written a few years before or after 1880, contains no reference to Dédé’s ancestry (no doubt in part because he had a hand in writing or directing the writing of it), the writer of this piece, less than a decade later, took another tack.
Agreeable personality, a plebe’s physiognomy, a real bordelais celebrity; perhaps the best-known man in Bordeaux. There are two explanations for it. First, M. Dédé is a Negro [nègre] of the finest black, which helps more than a little, we’re convinced, to make him stand out in a crowd of “pale faces,” as Fenimore Cooper, Gabriel Ferry and Gustave Aimard call them. And, secondly, over a good number of years, he has been exposed to the view of thousands and thousands of spectators, whether at the

Figure 8. Edmond Dédé, original on galley copy of Bordeaux-Artiste, 1887-88.
(By permission of Archives municipales de Bordeaux)

Alcazar, the Grand Théâtre or the Folies-Bordelaises, in his conductor’s chair, rising well above the level of the musicians and the parterre.
Ask yourself: how weary had the nearly sixty-year-old Dédé become of the jokey and ungenerous references to his skin color? The offense he might have taken at the suggestion that he owed his success as much to his skin color as to his music will always be a matter of speculation. But that the French people harbored negative stereotypes of people of color was a reality he must have experienced frequently.
At the start of his piece, the writer of the Bordeaux-Artiste profile identifies Dédé as a nègre, a commonly used noun that was not quite interchangeable with noir. While nègre did not have the same force as the worst racist epithet in English, noir was the more polite usage and the preferred term in official documents.65 And yet French newspapers in the nineteenth century tended to used nègre to refer to people of African ancestry. In the columns of Bordeaux’s most reputable papers the choice of that term worked fist-in-glove with the derogatory, denigrating, and paternalistic tones used to report on the behavior of black and mixed-race people. To take one example, one that verges exceedingly close to Dédé's working world, there appeared in 1882 in La Nouvelliste de Bordeaux, edited by, we should recall, his librettist, Louis Brunet, among the miscellaneous news this item:
between Negroes [Nègres]—Two men of color, engaged until recently as gymnastes at the Alcazar de la Bastide, got into a quarrel last evening in a bar on rue d’Ares.
One of them, named Prouès [Prowess], accused his colleague Taylor, who was always late, of causing him to miss a job that he had contracted for in Angoulême. He pulled out a gun and shot him.
The bullet lodged in Taylor's arm.
The murderer was almost immediately arrested.
Before being placed in the city jail, he declared that he had bought the gun with the intention of killing Taylor.
This confession, shorn of artifice, does not seem to have whiten this vindictive black [noir].66
Or the following from 1889:
poor black [Pauvre Nègre]: The civilization of Negroes is making real progress. We know that in other times travelers obtained from them trinkets and beads; that is no longer the case today. They want puppets at 7 francs, 75 centimes each and richly bound books.
But while their tastes are changing, their methods remain the same.
They love to steal as much as they ever did before. Unfortunately for them, they do not take into account the place where they are and what works in the center of Africa—where there are no policemen—presents a bit more of a problem in the center of Paris, especially in the shopping area of the Hotel de Ville.
However, it was there that a Negro with the finest black skin named Virgile was surprised, having hidden under his frock coat along his back a puppet and under his arm a book.
His alluring features remarked upon, and the hump of the puppet looked none the less bizarre, he was hauled in to the police station.
There, all was explained, and this little adventure ended with the new Virgile receiving a sentence of ten months in prison.6?
These two newspaper items, chosen somewhat at random from similar examples, might have appeared in any French newspaper or anywhere in the United States for that matter. The attitude of intellectual and cultural superiority, the well-worn play on the association of white with innocence and black with evil, and the condescension were and continue to be familiar to anyone who has ever read a newspaper. Newspapers, then and now, tend to reflect back to their readers what society's dominant ethnic or racial group thinks or what the editors want them to think. Nearly two centuries after Dédé’s birth, it ought not to be necessary to point out that the humor displayed in these examples was not benign even in their own time. Behind the seemingly gentle poking fun at the visually distinct people in an overwhelmingly light-skinned or white population lies a set of old attitudes reinforced by geopolitical events around the globe, to which the French people were by no means immune.68 Among the bordelais population—with the roots of their city’s economy embedded in the fruits of slave labor—were a small number of men and women of African descent, most of whom most likely were not as dark-skinned as Edmond Dédé.
As one of the principal ports of entry into France, Bordeaux had a population that was in constant flux. There are no statistical records of the number of foreigners living in Bordeaux before 1888, when the national government, in a particularly xenophobic mood, decreed that all municipalities had to register the foreigners in their jurisdiction. The first such registration and subsequent survey in Bordeaux, carried out between October and December of 1889 found 6,700 foreign nationals in a city with over 200,000 inhabitants. The largest group, not surprisingly, were Spaniards. The Germans, Italians, British, and Swiss formed the next largest national groups. There were 213 U.S. citizens residing in Bordeaux that year.6? Of them 87 were men, 52 were women, and 74 were children. Other sources show that many of them belonged to families attached to companies with branches in Bordeaux. Sincethere is no record of Dédé applying for naturalization as a French citizen, he must have been counted among them. But he was unlikely to have sought French citizenship, since it was a long, complicated, and costly process that discouraged all but the well-to-do.70 Regardless of his national status, as a Creole of color whose first language was French, he would not necessarily have had much of a common bond with those other Americans in Bordeaux, the majority of whom would have been white and English-speaking.
Conscious of his dignity, Dédé was unlikely to have made common cause with the poor migrants who were black or mixed race passing through or settled in Bordeaux. By the time he moved to the Folies-Bordelaises, mixed-race people may not have seen an association with him as advantageous. Small numbers of people of color had settled in Bordeaux since the eighteenth century. The port’s location at a terminus of the transatlantic route connecting France to the Caribbean made it a key entry for economic and political refugees from Saint-Domingue and Cuba. Many of the people of color who came to Bordeaux were sailors in transit and did not stay in the port. With the growth of cafés-concerts and music halls over the second half of the nineteenth century, black performers, many of them gymnasts and specialty acts, like Prouès and the murdered Taylor in the newspaper article, passed through the city.71
Whatever prejudice Dédé confronted in France paled in comparison to what he would have experienced back in New Orleans. With the exception of a few years in the 1870s, he had steady employment as an orchestra leader throughout the 1860s, late 1870s, and 1880s, perhaps not in the professional milieu he would have preferred, but he competed against French musicians for jobs and won them. Popular music has always been popular chiefly among the young and the not-so-young. Growing older, then, cannot have been easy for him, as styles changed and the imperative of keeping up with the public’s taste required a young person’s energy.
His son, Eugène, who helped his father rehearse the orchestra at the Folies- Bordelaises, was already swimming in the current of the popular music business and would make the move to Paris at the end of the 1880s. The chance for the son to make a name for himself was coming; the father’s was passing. The elder Dédé turned sixty in 1887, the year the second profile of him, with the image of his downcast face and slumped shoulders, appeared in print. As the decade of the 1880s drew to a close, his name was mentioned less and less often in the theater and music sections of the newspapers. Certainly there were no more premieres at either the Folies-Bordelaises or the Grand Théâtre. What was there for him in Bordeaux if he was not working?5 • City of Song
An audacious man-of-the-people opened a new theater in Bordeaux on May 30, 1861. Martial Leglise, better known to his contemporaries by his nickname “Bazas,” modeled his new enterprise on the elaborate and extremely popular cafés-concerts of Paris. He was convinced that what worked for the Parisians would work equally well for the people of Bordeaux. His Alcazar Theater stood in Place Napoleon (now place Stalingrad) at the other end of the Pont de Pierre that links the city center to the right bank of the Garonne River (fig. 3). It was no lonely outpost of morally dubious entertainment. It fit right in with the changing times, and the theater building itself reflected those times. A large dock surmounted the neoclassical, symmetrical facade, reminding theatergoers of a subtle but palpable shift in their lives-—the increasingly firm demarcation between work time and leisure time. Bazas, who oversaw the construction of the Alcazar Theater, was as attuned to the bourgeois expression “time is money” as he was to the lucrative potential of drinks mixed with songs therein.1
But when that perspicacious entrepreneur opened the doors of Bordeaux’s first café-concert, he alienated some high-minded theatergoers and most of the city’s theater managers. The former thought he was adulterating high culture; the latter were convinced he was drawing away their customers. The authorities feared he was corrupting the moral standards of and encouraging political dissent among the workers. Au contraire, Bazas retorted. The astute businessman claimed he was raising standards, not lowering them, and he was making the workers happy. Bazas claimed to well understand what respectable working men and women enjoyed and, more important, what they aspired to. He was, in fact, one of them.
Figure 3. Exterior of the former Alcazar Theater, place Stalingrad, La Bastide, Bordeaux. (Photograph by author, 2014)

Martial Leglise grew up on the streets of early nineteenth-century Bordeaux. Either orphaned or abandoned when he was an infant and a self-confessed illiterate, he turned out to be an enterprising youngster. His working life began as a messenger boy for the company that operated stagecoaches—diligences, as they were called in French—between Bordeaux and the town of Bazas, upriver and inland about forty miles. Over time, he worked his way up to the position of driver. He became so well known along the route that people began to call him by the name of his daily destination. The job of driving a stagecoach provided him with opportunities to make money on the side. Remunerations for carrying messages or packages, both licit and illicit, and the odd job now and then led to new opportunities. Eventually, Bazas saved enough money to build and open the Alcazar Theater. Why this stagecoach driver felt competent to start a theater is inexplicable, but he seems to have known what he was doing. A good director of a theater, he wrote a few years later, had to have a good head for business and the energy to travel ceaselessly in search of talented performers.2
He also had to have trustworthy lieutenants to oversee the functioning of the theater on a day-to-day basis, fo handle the business operations and accounts, Bazas hired a man by the name of Monsieur Marville. Then he looked around for someone to oversee the singers, music, and actors, aboutwhich he admitted he knew little. Whomever he initially hired must have been up to the job, because the Alcazar was a success from the start. Over the next few decades, France’s best, most famous performers all trod the boards of Bazas’s theater. The impresario himself became a local celebrity, albeit a raffish one. According to the cultural newspaper Bordeaux-Artiste, the street urchin who, as we would say today, reinvented himself became one of the city’s best-loved characters.
Within a few years of the theater’s opening in the mid-i86os, Bazas lured Edmond Dédé away from the most prestigious theater in the city and appointed him the music director of the Alcazar Theater. Going to work for Bazas was a turning point in Dédé’s career. Over the course of his more than three decades in Bordeaux, Dédé tried to make a living catering to popular tastes for light songs, polkas, and waltzes and also to pursue his own ambition to compose music that met the more exacting standards of art music critics. Today, we would characterize his efforts as working both sides of the street: popular mu-	J
sic on one side and art (or, classical) music on the other. By the 1860s, that	-
street he had to cross was already wide and growing increasingly wider. The wider the gap grew between highbrow and lowbrow music, the more difficult it became for composers to bridge that gap. For a while, Edmond Dédé succeeded as well as and even better than most of his European peers.
Given a choice, Edmond Dédé would not have settled in Bordeaux. Although one of France's major cities, then and now, it lies near the southwestern Atlantic coast, too far from Paris to make an impression on the music world there. To attain musical celebrity in any genre, a musician had to be in the French capital, where the best schools, halls, critics, sheet music publishers, and musicians were. A job somewhere in northern France would have been preferable to one in Bordeaux. By the time he arrived in southwest France in i860, a new rail line had reduced travel time to the capital. But although it was certainly more comfortable than stagecoach, the train still took around forty-eight hours to reach Paris, stopping in Poitiers, Tours, and Orléans. Thus, he had to make the most of his first contract in Bordeaux, the one that prevented him from accepting a job offer in Rouen, less than a day’s journey from Paris. As consolation prizes go, however, the position as répétiteur (assistant conductor) of the ballet orchestra at the Grand Théâtre, one of the best provincial theaters in the country, was not a bad start for an up-and-coming composer.
Settling in another major river city was a mixed blessing for the ambitious composer. On the positive side, Bordeaux’s port, like New Orleans’s, served its prosperous middling and well-to-do mercantile families, whose fortunes were founded on transatlantic trade. And like the Crescent City, Bordeaux had a culturally diverse and economically variegated population. On the negative side, the prosperity of both cities derived directly and indirectly from the labor of enslaved men and women. New Orleans had been the chief slave emporium of the U.S. South; Bordeaux relied heavily on products produced by enslaved labor in the U.S. South and the French Caribbean colonies. The synergy between the positive and negative facets of Bordeaux's society fostered an urban culture that was as cosmopolitan as it was complicit in the worst aspects of the nineteenth-century global economy. A dark-skinned man of African descent like Dédé would have endured many affronts to his dignity in Bordeaux, just as he would have in his native city even after the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment in 1868 that abolished slavery. But in his native country, legal segregation and entrenched racism would have prevented him from pursuing his ambitions of becoming a successful and respected composer and conductor. In France, no law, no system of segregation prevented him from trying. Achieving his goals was an altogether different matter.
Dédé arrived in Bordeaux at a time when the city’s and the region’s economy were adjusting to shifts in transatlantic trading networks. In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, Bordeaux served as France’s main port of entry for sugar from French Caribbean colonies and the principal one for exports heading back to island markets. During the Napoleonic and Saint- Domingue wars, American and French merchants developed good relations as they worked together to minimize the risks they faced at a time when war imperiled seaborne traded Even after the loss of Saint-Domingue, two-thirds of the vessels leaving Bordeaux headed to the colonies in the Caribbean. Key colonial commodities—sugar, especially—fed local industries in the Aquitaine: sugar refineries, chocolate manufacturing, and the production of sea biscuits. But from 1815 on, Bordeaux’s sugar refineries fared increasingly poorly against British, Danish, and German competitors, and lost business to rivals in other French ports/ To compensate for their declining hold on the Caribbean sugar market, bordelais merchants improved trade relations with the United States. Cotton and tobacco from the southern states arrived on steamers from New York, where the majority of cotton brokerage firms were based. In return, bordelais merchants sold to the Americans their colonial commodities, such as tea, cacao, pepper, indigo, coffee, and sugar. Before 1862, trade with the United States had grown so important to the city that only the British had more steamers moored along the riverfront/
By 1862, when the blockade of southern U.S. ports began, Bordeaux’s economy was showing signs of slowing down. Although the city’s economy had been relatively immune from Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte’s coup d’état in 1851 and the economic slump that affected the rest of France, the business and elected leaders of the city government moved too slowly to modernize the river's port. To accommodate the growing number of steamships with deeper drafts, Bordeaux’s city industrialists funded the conversion of the sloping, muddy riverbanks, which suited the anchorage of the older, increasingly outmoded sailing vessels, into concrete vertical piers (fig. 4). But the pace of the conversion was too slow, and the city was soon unable to compete with Nantes and Le Havre in the north. For much of the 1860s, gangplanks continued to bridge the gap between the decks of ships and the riverfront. The reluctance of the city leaders to invest in the piers contributed to the collapse of the region’s naval construction industry, starting in 1865 and continuing into the next decade.6

Figure 4. The waterfront of Bordeaux with the vertical piers visible (Photograph by author, 2014)The U.S. Civil War initially made Bordeaux’s economic position worse. The flow of cotton and tobacco to France was cut off by the northern blockade of southern ports. Losing access to U.S. cotton damaged the bank accounts of French industrialists, which encouraged many of them, and some politicians (including the emperor), to favor the Confederates. But France’s official position of neutrality during the war obliged the industrialists to offer only covert support to the rebels. At the same time, forced to find new sources of raw materials, French textile manufacturers began to look toward the eastern Mediterranean and India. After the end of the American Civil War, only one in five vessels leaving Bordeaux set its course for the northern Western Hemisphere. The majority of them went to South America, northern Europe, west Africa, southeast Asia, and the Pacific. They went laden with bottles of wine and handcrafts and returned with raw commodities. Bordeaux’s economy no longer rested on textiles and shipbuilding; now viticulture, wine production, and handicrafts industries in the smaller provincial towns became the region’s healthiest sectors?
The reliance of Bordeaux and the region of Gascony on the fruits of slave labor, as well as its distance from the centers of political turmoil in the eighteenth and first half of the nineteenth centuries, reinforced a conservative strain in bordelais politics, economy, and culture. Going as far back as the French Revolution, the loose association of revolutionaries called the Girondists (hailing, as they did, from the Gironde, the department of which Bordeaux is the capital), met their end on the guillotine for not being revolutionary enough for the radicals. The subsequent revolutions of 1830 and 1848 made little impression on the city. The political programs of republicans and socialists resonated with few people, including workers in the port and shipyards of Bordeaux. When Napoléon III launched his empire, the city scarcely flinched.
That quiescence characterized the bordelais response to the events of the second half of the nineteenth century. During the Second Empire, the advocates of republicanism in Bordeaux went silent for fear of arrest and imprisonment. The major newspapers reflected the gamut of political opinion between monarchist and Catholic, on one side, and lukewarm supporters of the government, on the other. It seems fitting, then, to recall that Baron Haussmann not only served as the prefect of the Gironde but was born and raised there. The beige limestone regularity of the city’s facades made a lasting impression on the staid, cautious character of the “Attila of the Straight Line,” whose changes to the Paris landscape had much in common with the appearance of Bordeaux’s city center. Napoleon Ill’s downfall in 1871, followed by the establish- ment and suppression of the Paris Commune in the same year, and then the formation of the Third Republic were political events of enormous consequence for the nation as a whole, but the rough waters of political change in the capital did not reach as far as Bordeaux. The toppling of Napoleon Ill’s statue at his ouster in 1871 was the bordelaise citizenry’s most energetic response to events.
In this relatively placid river city, removed from the political center in many ways, Dédé established a career and a life that was also remote from the concerns of his family and friends in New Orleans. The outbreak of the Civil War and the capture and occupation of New Orleans by federal troops in 1862 slowed down contact between Americans in Europe and their families at home until 1865, when the war ended. Some of Dédé’s family and at least one of his friends joined the Union forces occupying New Orleans. When the occupying governor, Major General Benjamin F. Butler, created regiments for men of color, Dédé’s brothers, cousins, and his old friend Joseph Tinchant enlisted.8	}
News of the death of his grandmother, Maria Incamacion, the widow of Basile	°
senior, on Christmas Eve 1863 undoubtedly took longer to reach him than it would have before the war.s Within five years of that loss, Louise Dupré, the wife of Basile fils, died on April 1,1865, at the age of sixty-five, in the home she shared with her husband on the comer of St. Claude and Barrack Streets in Treme.10 Basile fils outlived his wife by only three years, dying at the age of sixty-four in the home of his son François, at 381 St. Ann Street in Treme, on February 28, 1868. The few instruments that formed his personal effects and the two pieces of real estate he owned brought the worth of his total assets to $4,273.40. Once his executors deducted his debts and their fees, each of the three natural sons of the late Basile fils inherited $300.”
His youth in Louisiana was behind him. For the first five years or so in Bordeaux, the Louisiana musician and composer, now in his thirties, had steady employment at the Grand Théâtre. People started paying attention to the newcomer soon after he started working in the prestigious theater that still stands where the cours de 1’Intendance meets the allée de Tourny. The position of répétiteur of the ballet entailed playing a ballet’s music on the piano during the dancers’ rehearsals. So positioned, he had the chance to compose his own ballet music and have it performed. The first piece of his to be produced at the Grand Théâtre was a one-act ballet, Nénéha, Queen of the Fairies, presented there in 1863. That ballet was the only one he received credit for, but at least one member of the public had the impression that he composed most of the music of the Grand Théâtre’s ballets, probably the one-act productions.12 Nénéha was judged a success, but one critic issued a caution: “Monsieur Dédé understands marvelously well the great art of orchestration; this young man possesses the least that is required, inspiration. Imagination grounded in training can perform miracles. We foresee great things for M. Dédé, but he must not indulge in excess. The queen of the fairies should not complain at length to the sound of a drum and a bass drum; she prefers melodies that take flight, the wisp of a breeze, a shimmering steam of silver.”^
This was not the last time a critic would express the wish that Dédé tone his music down. It is interesting that the critic touched on percussion, the very feature of the ballet that, had the music survived, might have allowed us to tie his music to his roots in Louisiana. Perhaps if he had stayed at the Grand Théâtre, he might have adjusted his compositions more to the tastes of the art music critics. However, he moved on. According to the profile of him in Bordeaux-Artiste from 1887-88, Dédé spent six years at the Grand Théâtre. This is difficult to credit. He is listed in the Bordeaux city directory as répétiteur of the Grand Théâtre in 1863 and 1864. Thereafter, his name does not reappear in the almanac until 1871, which suggests that 1865 is the year he went to work for the enterprising Bazas at the Alcazar Theater.^
He remained at the Alcazar Theater for a further five years. And then, in 1870, a tumultuous year in French history, he managed a small café-concert. After that, we lose sight of him until 1877, when he turns up as the composer of a well-received ballet at the Grand Théâtre. Throughout this period, he continued to work both sides of the street, composing two ballets for the more prestigious hall and one-act operettas for the cafés-concerts. By 1880 or 1881, he had moved to the Folies-Bordelaises, a big café-concert whose offerings shifted—some said declined—from extracts of opera to the popular precincts of vaudeville. The shift reflected the pressure on musicians and theater management to cater to the changing tastes of the broadest swathe of the public. As a consequence, the relentless commercialization of music increasingly forced musicians and composers to choose one side of the street or the other. On one side lay the elegant but highly competitive world of art music and on the other the brassy, lurid colors of the crowd. Dédé’s attempt to cross back and forth could not, in the long run, succeed, for reasons that had less to do with him and more to do with the changing market for popular music.
Of its kind, the Alcazar was the best theater in Bordeaux. Indeed, for a while it was the only one of its kind. By moving from the Grand Théâtre to the Alcazar, Dédé did more than change employers. He moved from a low-level job in a first-rate music hall to high-level position in a low-brow music hall, where light, accessible songs, one-act operettas and ballets, and excerpts from grand operas were the standard fare. His decision is not hard to understand. He needed the money, or, at any rate, he needed more of it than he could earn at the Grand Théâtre. If he had only himself to support, he likely would have stayed. But after the summer of 1864, he was no longer alone.
On June 18,1864, four or five years after settling in the city, the thirty-seven- year-old Edmond Dédé married twenty-nine-year-old Anne Catherine Antoinette Sylvia Leflet, a white Frenchwoman who, like a lot of working-class single women, was living in a rented furnished roomT The bridegroom brought along to the marriage ceremony four friends, three of whom were music teachers. His bride, Sylvie Leflet, as she was called, was born in Toulouse on October 7,1835, to unwed parents. At the time of her marriage to Edmond, her father, Antoine Leflet, a gardener, was living in Havana, Cuba, and her mother, Catherine Claverie, was deceased. Antoine Leflef s presence in the Western Hemisphere in 1864, recorded in the marriage record, tempts us to match the gardener from Toulouse with the French-born fifty-year-old laborer of the same name enumerated in the 1850 federal census in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana.16 It is a curious possibility that Dédé’s father-in-law was in the vicinity of New Orleans when the young composer returned from Mexico. Did they meet?
Aside from that possible coincidence, within four years or so of his arrival in Bordeaux Dédé had married a woman of illegitimate birth who claimed no profession. Although he, like Sylvie, was a natural child of unwed parents, he claimed for himself a more respectable past, insofar as he identified Basile and his wife, Louise, as his father and mother. This was not, as we know by now, the first time Dédé counted on the limits of communication technology to obscure details about his past. He asserted his respectability in a city whose inhabitants were more socially and religiously conservative than those in New Orleans. And now that he was changing jobs—moving from an art music venue to a less socially prestigious theater, he gathered all the respectability that he could muster out of his past. In 1864, the need for a larger salary must have made working for Bazas appealing. Three years after their marriage, his need for money grew more urgent when, on January 13,1867, Sylvie gave birth to a son, Eugène Arcade Dédé.17 Eugène was to be their only child.
The marriage between these two people of humble origins had special significance for Americans of both African and European descent who heard the news. A few months after the wedding, the New Orleans Tribune, a short-lived newspaper launched during the Civil War years by leaders of the local free community of color and associated with the Louisiana Republican Party, announced the nuptials, which were reported to have taken place in the Church of St. Dominic (now the Church of Notre-Dame).18 A year later, in 1865, one of the principal abolitionist newspapers in the United States, the National Anti-Slavery Standard, also reported Dédé’s marriage. That piece stressed that "Mr. Dede is a black man, as black as any one can be. Driven from his country by the stubbornness of prejudice, he went to France, and is now leader of an orchestra in one of the Bordeaux Theatres. His fame as an artist is European. He contracted matrimony, in legitimate bonds, before the Mayor of the Imperial city, with a young lady of accomplishment, belonging to one of the best families, and, of course, of Caucasian blood.”1®
For the white editors and the mainly white abolitionist readership, as well as for Dédé himself, the assumed gold standard of cultural achievement was measured in European currency. But the reference to Dédé’s dark complexion and Leflet’s “Caucasian blood” is more remarkable than it might first appear. In an age when many European Americans were moved to pity by images of seemingly “white” and light-skinned enslaved men, women, and children, but rejected the so-called “amalgamation of the races,” positive references to dark- skinned people of African descent marrying European women were exceedingly rare. To the overwhelming majority of white and black Americans, Edmond Dédé looked more like one of the masses of recently emancipated slaves, whose successful assimilation into free society was very much in doubt among white Americans, than the mostly mixed-race people who led the fight for equal rights. From the perspective of all Americans, Dédé was and would always be conspicuous for his darkness.
Meanwhile, while shouldering the ordinary burden of supporting a family, Dédé got on with his work. Whereas the ambience at the Grand Théâtre was rarified but cash poor, Bazas’s Alcazar Theater was of the people, for the people, and sustained by the people’s demand for drink and diversion. Bazas himself, in fact, had much to say in print about the difficulty of the business of running art music theaters and the low wages of musicians who worked in them. In 1863, when Dédé was still working at the Grand Théâtre, Bazas published a pamphlet in which he proposed solutions to what he, an outsider really, saw as the main problems faced by the managers of Bordeaux’s traditional theaters.20 In his view, the chief obstacles to turning a profit in theater were the lack of sufficient seating in the halls, the rising salaries of performing artists, and the government-imposed obligation on theater managers to mount four expensive productions in the summer season. These issues were close tothe hearts of all theater managers. But Bazas’s little pamphlet does not tell the whole story.
The gamut of theater and music halls in Bordeaux ranged from the prestigious halls like the Grand Théâtre to the lowly working-class cafés-chantants or cafés-concerts, many of which were little more than storefronts. When it was built in the 1780s, the Grand Théâtre could seat 1,750 people. Subsequent remodeling and restorations had reduced the number of seats to 1,150 by 1864. Fewer tickets meant higher prices and fewer ticket buyers. In his pamphlet, Bazas urged the municipal government to allow each of the larger theaters to install 300 additional seats. Ticket prices, he predicted, would go down, more people would buy them, and profits would go up.21 Only then would managers be in a position to confront the other problem he identified, the soaring fees demanded by the most sought-after performer.
According to his calculations, between 1858 and 1864, the fees demanded by singers more than doubled while the number of their performances fell.	>
Whereas in the past a singing star would agree to perform twenty-seven times	-
in a month and receive 700 to 800 francs in compensation, now singers mounted the stage only sixteen to eighteen times a month for fees ranging between 1,800 and 2,000 francs. Singers’ fees were the single most expensive item in a theater manager’s budget. Bazas rolled out the figures. The salaries paid to the stage manager (machiniste), painter, cashier, wardrobe supervisor, prop man, librarian (to keep track of all those libretti, scores, and sheet music), concierge, fireman, maintenance, and contrôleurs, not forgetting the 100 francs a night for the gas lighting and the obligatory contribution to the city’s poor relief fund, left barely 278 francs to pay the chorus, the musicians, and the dancers—at least fifty people in a theater like the Grand Théâtre. Songwriters and authors also demanded their share of a theater’s profit. Ever since the creation in 1851 of the Society of Authors, Composers, and Music Editors (Société des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs de musique, or SAGEM), theaters paid the organization fees for the use of songs and plays written by its members (Edmond Dédé became a member after he arrived in Bordeaux). It is hard to imagine that the management of the Grand Théâtre could afford to pay a living wage to a répétiteur like Edmond Dédé. Added to these fiscal burdens was the requirement that the Grand Théâtre, the Théâtre Français, and the other art music halls mount each summer, whether the demand was there or not, four major productions (troupes complètes): an opera, an operetta (or comic opera), a ballet, and a stage play. The costumes, scenery, and performers’ salaries were hugely expensive.
Although his own café-concert theater was exempt from these requirements, Bazas nonetheless had to pay for a similar battery of skilled workers and celebrated artists, gas to light the hall, and authors’ rights. In a real sense, as the owner-manager of Bordeaux’s biggest café-concert, Bazas had entered as an outsider into the debate about art music theaters and their regulation. The underlying and self-serving message he purveyed in his pamphlet was: “Don’t blame me for your lack of box-office receipts. Blame the government.”
It was true that his stage did not sag under the weight of four mounted full productions every summer, as the art music houses did. His theater was a top- of-the-line café-concert, where patrons entered for free, paid to drink, and stayed for the show. Until his theater opened, cafés-concerts in Bordeaux had been small, humble places, often little more than dingy comer bars where only the working poor were not ashamed to be seen. Now his café-concert was the first to take on airs. But he operated under an entirely different set of regulations from those imposed on the Grand Théâtre. Bazas came into the business at a moment when those restrictions were about to undergo reform, partly as a result of the resistance from him and other café-concert managers.
When cafés-concerts evolved from the open-air summer cafés on the Champs-Elysées and suburban goguettes to the large, ornate indoor winter theaters that stayed open all year, their managers faced a hostile environment more powerful than the one that Bazas encountered in his provincial city. Viewing the cafés-concerts as competition, the traditional theaters pressured the government to restrict what café-concert performers could and could not do, wear, and perform on stage. Before 1867, no scenery was allowed on the stage behind the performers. At most, potted plants adorned the singers’ back- drop. Cafés-concerts could not present plays or operas in their entirety. Singers were forbidden to wear anything other than formal evening wear for men and low-necked ball gowns and fancy hats for women. No costumes appropriate for the play or opera excerpts they performed were allowed. The singers had to make the most of the limited range of visual expression they were granted.
For the first fifteen years, café-concert shows followed a standard pattern of performance. The women singers, dressed to the nines, sat fanning themselves on chairs arranged in a semi-circle stretching across the stage, called the corbeille (basket). While the male singers stood behind them and awaited their turn, the women one by one rose, stepped to the footlights and sang and flirted (but not too much) with the men in the audience. Like earlier forms of singing cafés, when the singers took a break, they descended from the stage and wandered among the tables soliciting tips, a practice known as la quête (1quêter means “to beg”). Toward the end of the 1850s, the quête was replaced by contracts with café management for a predetermined fee and number of performances. And the corbeille was also disappearing around the same time that the café-concert star (la vedette) took center stage. The first such celebrity was a wildly popular singer, Thérésa, who began her career in the 1860s and lasted all the way into the early twentieth century, the dawn of the golden era of Josephine Baker and the Folies-Bergères.22
The practice of having all the performers seated on stage gave way in the 1860s to a succession of acts that were mostly songs and ballet and opera extracts. In Dédé’s first years at the Alcazar, over the course of an evening, quite a long list of performers moved on and off stage. To take a typical show, on July 27,1863, the public started arriving at the Alcazar around five o’clock in the late afternoon, when the orchestra opened the program with dance music, usually a quadrille, to enliven the mood. That piece was followed by a pas de deux from a ballet. A succession of three singers came on after that, followed by a couple who danced a polka on stage, two more singers, and a comic sketch. The first part of the program came to an end with the last pas de deux from a ballet. To begin the second part of the program, the orchestra played an overture. A soprano then performed an aria from an opera, followed by a trio of ballet dancers, a duet from an opera, a comic singer, another pas de deux, and, to conclude, a comic sketch. But the evening was not over. For the final segment of the evening, thé Alcazar offered what it called a “pantomime-parody-mythological burlesque,” entitled “Pygmalion et Galathea.” By the end of the six-hour show, twenty-seven performers in solos, pairs, and trios had taken part.23
Prospects for more varied programs improved when the director of theater administration (under the Prefecture of Police) in Paris loosened the regulations on March 31,1867. In a decree that applied to the provinces as well as to Paris, the government now permitted café-concert singers to wear costumes appropriate to the opera excerpts they performed.24 Café-concert managers had finally convinced the traditional theater managers—or the government— that they were not competitors. Bazas himself argued—with a large dose of self-interest—that his theater aided ticket sales at the Grand Théâtre by accul- turating the workers who attended his shows to appreciate serious opera and fine singing.23 Ignoring the question of whether they could afford the tickets to hear the music to which they had now been supposedly acculturated, he as much as claimed that he was performing an undervalued public service.
Bazas broadened the appeal of the café-concert beyond workers with shows of singers and dancers performing opera and light classical songs as well as more popular pieces. Many singers worked in both cafés-concerts and the more prestigious halls but assumed stage names when they appeared in the more down-market venues.26 Workers, students, office clerks, off-duty soldiers, and women indifferent to their reputations entered for free and stayed for as long as they could afford to pay for drinks. Over the course of the evening, they sipped their beverages, chatted with friends, and listened to singers and watched the dancers. This, in Bazas’s view, was adult education. Though he might have been sincere, the relaxation of the regulations seemed to be an implicit acknowledgment that the traditional theaters had little to lose. As the century progressed, cafés-concerts all over France, but especially in Paris and French provincial cities, started to become more like what Americans and the British would term vaudeville or music hall.
In the transition from café-concert to music hall, audiences still had tables on which to place their drinks while watching a show, the nature of which kept changing. The taxonomy of café-concert, music hall, and vaudeville grew ever more confused and conffising. Acrobats, gymnasts, folk dancers, child prodigies, and other acts were interspersed with the singers and ballet dancers. Later, in the late 1880s, off-shoots of the cafés-concerts, like the Moulin Rouge, which opened in Paris in 1889, provided space in front of the stage where customers could dance. In the music halls of Bordeaux, too, men and women danced the polka and the mazurka, or swayed in their seats to the overtures of Offenbach’s or Dédé’s operettas, and drank.
If the management and performers at the cafés-concerts gained respectability over time, in the front of the house, barely controlled anarchy reigned and was tempered only, if at all, by the presence of the police. These representatives of the state had as their first priority the suppression of political expression. Before the Second Empire, drinking establishments patronized by workers were the principal venues where political dissent was aired.2? Once Louis-Napoleon took power in 1851, political songs were banned altogether but especially in cafés-concerts. Flag-waving, patriotic jingoistic military music was approved, although, interestingly, singing the Marseillaise was not. Perhaps it was too evocative of political unrest for the government.
Only secondarily did the police presence discourage licentious or disruptive behavior. What the government wanted especially to avoid was the airing of criticism of its foreign policy, commentary on religious debates, and references to the French Revolution and its ideals.28 When late in his reign Napoléon III instituted liberal reforms, allowing some expressions of dissent in public, political songs on the stages of cafés-concerts continued to be prohibited, suchwas the power of satirical song. Only in the brief interlude of the Paris Commune of 1871 were songs satirizing foreign and domestic policy decisions allowed to be performed on stage. After 1871, the Third Republic again imposed censorship on performances in theaters and cafés-concerts?9 Freedom of expression remained thwarted for most of the nineteenth century.
On the national, Parisian, and provincial levels, the Ministry of the Interior exerted its authority over cafés-concerts principally by two means: censorship and repression?0 Those two approaches were buttressed by reports from informants and commentary in the press. Whether in Paris or on a local level, the prefect of the police required theater managers to get approval of all singers they hired and all songs and texts to be performed in their theaters. Each time the prefect of the police in Bordeaux granted permission to a theater manager to hire a singer, he reiterated in his letter of approval the regulations under which the theater had to operate: theaters could present no more than one act from any play or opera once in an evening, and no more than three of four persons were to perform in it.
Repression of political content meant surveillance, which seems to have been as effective in maintaining order as surveillance at the borders was in monitoring the movement of migrants. Which is to say, it was not very effective. A policeman had to be present at all performances to ensure that political malcontents and seditious material were not slipped into the program. Efforts to blacklist certain performers were evaded by the relatively widespread use of stage names. Maintaining order in theaters was equally a chimera. As a fallback, the state relied on an informal network of informants, similar to the way illegal migrants were or were not tracked down?1 Police records in Bordeaux contain anonymous letters from police spies—the dreaded mouches—and outraged busybodies. Sometimes the most reliable reports were those the police authorities read in the newspapers.
That the efforts of the police to regulate and monitor the cafés-concerts often failed, at least in terms of maintaining public order, newspaper coverage makes abundantly clear. Reports of incidents in theaters are nearly as common as critiques of the performances on stage. The presence of the police did not dampen the ardor of theatergoers, who were not shy in expressing their opinions of performances. If the first singer on the bill happened to be a novice—a placard reading “Audition” signaled to the audience a singer’s debut—she or he suffered the hoots and catcalls of a raucous audience?2 All singers had to contend with spontaneous audience sing-alongs, less than charitably referred to as “bellowing” (beugler) by those who sneered at the cafés-concerts?3 Indeed,
as was true in Paris, the majority of the clientele of the caf’-conc’s, as they were called in slang, came from the humble strata of bordelais society, but café management set aside tables for better-off patrons who were prepared to pay for champagne and exclusivity.54 Risqué material was forbidden, yet it was a stretch to depict a theater like the Alcazar as family-friendly, as Bazas did. An advertising leaflet for the Alcazar Theater in the 1860s shows a mother and father standing with their children in the interior of the theater while a show goes on in the background (fig. 5). But the bourgeois respectability Bazas and other café-concert managers claimed for themselves could not change the fact that the typical atmosphere in a café-concert remained raffish, bohemian, and not quite respectable.

Figure 5. The interior of the Alcazar Theater. (By permission of Archives municipales de Bordeaux, Théâtres)Political censorship was a process that Edmond Dédé, as a novice manager of a café-concert, had to negotiate. In 1870, he assumed the direction of the Café Delta, a small café-concert at 16 rue Voltaire, off the cours de 1'Intendance. The Café Delta was likely another undertaking of Bazas’s, and he put it in the hands of his employee, whom he had hired away from the Grand Théâtre around 1865. The Bordeaux city directories list Dédé as the Delta’s manager for 1871 and 1872.35 While he ran the Delta, some of the greatest stars of the café-concert circuit throughout France stepped on to this stage Accounts differ as to how long the café-concert lasted, but the most reliable of them claims that it lasted until 1877.36 Dédé was there at its opening as the manager, but it is less clear that he stayed until it closed.
A more interesting question, however, is whether he had anything to do with the cafe's name. What did “Delta” refer to? Within the context of bordelais society, it had no apparent significance. Bordeaux could not be called a delta river port. New Orleans, in contrast, could. It is an intriguing notion that Dédé, if he had a hand in naming the café-concert, might have been paying tribute to the Mississippi delta, future home of the blues.
Putting together a timeline of Dédé’s movements based on the sketchy dates provided by the profiles in L’Artiste, de Bordeaux and Bordeaux-Artiste is difficult. Of the two profiles, the later one, from 1887-88, contains more details. It starts with his birth in New Orleans and moves on to his emigration to France, his studies in Paris, and the intricacies of his employment history leading to Bordeaux. At least a third of the article recounts Bazas’s story. Once the narrative reaches Dédé’s move to the Alcazar in 1865, the dates begin to deviate from dates documented elsewhere. Since Dédé was undoubtedly the source of the narrative, it is his version of his past. The author of the profile claims that Dédé was “an assiduous and devoted collaboration of Bazas” for over ten years.
But the year 1870 with its turmoil led to the closing of the Delta. The moment for the brassy sound of the café-concert had passed. When his café closed he had to accept a job as a violin-soloist at the Grand Théâtre in Algiers. Some years later, he picked up his bow again with the same determination he had shown in the past. This time, his sojourn was temporary and the following year he went to fight the battle at the Casino of Marseille. But he soon returned here [Bordeaux] and after spending 1880 at the Alcazar, he was engaged by M. Verdier of the Folies- Bordelaises, where he remains to this day.As he had when he went to Mexico City in 1848, Dédé again availed himself of an imperial opportunity.*7 Except in this instance, the port city of Algiers, on the southern coast of the Mediterranean Sea, had a more promising job market for a musician like Dédé than what Mexico City offered nearly twenty years before. Over the decades since its conquest by France in 1830, Algeria had received a large influx of Europeans. With the encouragement of the French government, working-class immigrants from all over Europe went in search of work and settled there, like the Americans who went to Mexico in 1848. The number of European settlers in Algeria rose from 131,000 in 1851 to 230,000 in 1871, around the time that Dédé left Bordeaux.}8
He arrived there in the early 1870s, in the aftermath of a series of environmental disasters and periods of famine. The political climate was unstable, especially during the transition from the Second Empire to the Third Republic. During the Second Empire, the divergent interests of the French government, the permanent settlers, or colons as they were called, and the indigenous Muslim population created friction. Napoleon Ill’s imperial government hoped to avoid alienating the indigenous Muslim landowners of Algeria by granting them a limited form of property law, but the settlers had no interest in making such accommodations. They wanted to be in charge, to the extent that they wanted to fully incorporate Algeria into France, fully endowed with French law. To them, the indigenous Muslim population were irrelevant, except insofar as they were workers for the Europeans. The Muslim landowners might have resigned themselves to French colonial rule if they had been allowed to exercise even in a limited way their own form of property rights, but the European settlers fought vigorously against their participation in the government.^ These tensions led to an insurrection in 1871 by the Muslim population against the government and the settlers that was quickly suppressed.
Well-to-do Europeans went to Algiers and elsewhere in Algeria for the resorts, the thermal baths, and the allure of a familiar French culture superimposed on a locale perceived as exotic. They found there a well-established European music culture. Five or so years before Dédé arrived, the composer Salvador Daniel, son of a Spanish refugee to France, ended a decadelong sojourn in Algiers, where he taught music, studied indigenous music, and composed his own pieces. He acquired enough of a reputation that he met Napoleon III on more than one occasion. It is unlikely that Edmond Dédé met him as their time as students at the Conservatory in Paris did not overlap. Daniel returned to Paris in 1866 and subsequently accepted the position of director of the Conservatory during the Paris Commune in 1871. Along with thousands of others, he was executed during the week the Commune fell and the Third Republic was born. Not long after Dédé arrived in north Africa, another composer, Camille Saint-Saëns, first visited Algiers; he returned there annually for the next eighteen years.40 Dédé’s decision to go to Algiers to look for work is therefore not surprising.
Unfortunately, nothing is known about Dédé’s time in Algiers. Nor does any trace of his subsequent stint at the Casino in Marseille survive. However, we do know that Dédé and his wife Sylvie obtained passports in 1871, declaring Lisbon as their destination.41 In fact, they were probably on their way to Algiers. After that date, Dédé disappears from view until we find him back in the conductor’s chair at the Alcazar Theater in 1877. Three years after that, he made his last move, to the Folies-Bordelaises, where he worked as one of two orchestra conductors until 1889.
Dédé’s move to the Folies-Bordelaises around 1880 appears to have been a step down in prestige, but it is hard to be sure. On the one hand, the Folies- Bordelaises was one of the most popular theaters in the city. On the other, it was even further removed from the world of the Grand Théâtre, where he wanted to be. Certainly, the Folies-Bordelaises lacked the ambience of the Grand Théâtre. Indeed, the singers, the conductor, the management, and the ever-present policemen fought a losing battle to impose even a slight sense of decorum on the proceedings at the Folies. Despite the presence of policemen, the theater’s clientele occasionally took control of performances, much to the annoyance of the music director. Nightly battles with an unruly bordelais crowd took a greater toll on the conductors than the strain of living under political censure in the Third Republic, as made clear by an account, published in one of the major newspapers in 1884, of an altercation during a performance at the Folies-Bordelaises.
In the second half of the show, the baritone finished singing and was called back for an encore. He returned to sing the last couplet. The audience, who wanted him to sing something new, applauded again to make him return.
Instead of the baritone, a female singer appeared. The audience energetically renewed their call for the baritone. Cries, hoots, whistles, and the stamping of walking sticks drowned out the woman’s voice and the brass of the orchestra. The deafening noise continued until the singer left the stage.
Once she was off, the baritone stepped forward and announced that as soon as the last note of the program had sounded, he would accede to the wishes of those in attendance.Satisfied, the audience applauded, but the conductor was not pleased. He expressed his displeasure aloud in disagreeable terms. He then admonished the audience and even threatened them.
The performance continued peacefully enough. Then the curtain fell before the baritone reappeared. But before it fell completely the conductor began playing the exit music.
New and not less lively protestations from the audience demanded that he keep his promise. The curtain went back up. The musicians continued to play the retreat. The acclaimed artist appeared finally, and the conductor, now very angry, abandoned the podium and disappeared.
The performance went on and ended without fuss.
The attitude assumed by the conductor in this incident is entirely at fault, and it was severely criticized by the audience members on their way out.42
Such were the occupational hazards of a musician who took his work seriously. And in this instance Edmond Dédé, one of the theater’s two conductors, may have been the one taking umbrage at the audience’s interference with the performance.
The Folies-Bordelaises had an ambiguous reputation among the cafés- concerts in the city. The best that newspaper reviewers could say was that the theater manager, Fernand Bory, really knew how to show the public a good time. But on the margins of the theater, particularly at the entrance on the busy thoroughfare, rue Sainte Catherine, chaos threatened. Anonymous letters from people living in the vicinity of the theater appear in police files. They contain complaints about prostitutes working the crowd at the Folies- Bordelaises in the 1870s. The police clipped from local newspapers letters to the editor calling for more police effort to clear the street of the women whose disorderly conduct at the theater’s entrance disrupted the entire neighborhood. One clipping consisted of a newspaper editorial: “There, the courtesan and the streetwalker openly engage in the shameful come-ons that their less well tricked-out comrades practice on the rue Dauphine and the cours d'Albret.” The complaint, the editors wanted to make clear, was not directed at the management of the Folies-Bordelaises; rather it pointed to the confusing and overlapping jurisdictions of the theater police, the morals police, and drinking establishments police—none of whom had authority over the space outside the theater where the offensive behavior was taking placed Still, no one thought the Folies-Bordelaises was a wholesome place.
The year 1870 was a watershed for Dédé, for reasons having to do with his compositions and the changes in popular demand for certain kinds of music. During the 1860s and 1870s, he composed most of the pieces that made contemporary musicologists take note of him. He drew praise for La Sensitive, a two-act ballet, which debuted at the Grand Théâtre in late April 1877, while he was conducting at the Alcazar Theater.44 Judging by the names he gave to the characters in the ballet, the now-lost plot resembled that of Giuseppe Verdi's grand opera set in ancient Egypt, Aida (1871). The principal ballerinas’ roles were called “Naïda,” “Néméa,” “Demona,” "Ophelia," and “Krydja,” all but the last derivative of Verdi or Shakespeare. The corps was rounded out by two high priests and an Indian. Reviewing the ballet, Anatole Loquin, a critic and editor of a short-lived monthly music journal La musique à Bordeaux, wrote, “There are some pretty motifs in the occasionally rather loud [brayante] music of the head conductor of the orchestra at the Alcazar Theater."4^ Loquin’s condescension suggests that it was by then unusual for a professional musician to produce pieces for both the cafés-concerts and an art music hall like the Grand Théâtre.
Most of the titles of Dédé’s works that survive from this period were typical of songs and music heard in venues like the Alcazar and the Folies-Bordelaises rather than the Grand Théâtre. Lester Sullivan, the scholar who has produced the most accurate summary of Dédé’s biographical details, counted over 250 dances, songs, ballet music, and orchestral works written during his exile in France. Between 1865 and 1881, Dédé and the lyricists with whom he worked published their songs in Bordeaux.46 From 1880 on, however, Dédé had most of his songs published in the urban market that mattered most to him, Paris. He was aiming at two different geographic markets simultaneously as the printed inscriptions on the sheet music make clear. To take one example, the cover of the sheet music for “My Handsome Tyrolian” (1876) bears the inscription, “Dedicated to Madame Maria Rivière of the Eldorado; sung by Mlle Marquet at the Alcazar.” The Eldorado was one of the largest and most popular cafés- concerts in Paris, but Mademoiselle Marquet toured the country and performed at Bourdeaux cafés-concerts like the Alcazar. Other examples of his surviving sheet music contain dedications to theater managers and performers based in Pans and also to colleagues in the business both in Bordeaux and in Paris. Dédé, then, was intending to bring his songs to the Parisian market as early as 1880.
Despite his productivity and the occasional reviews of his work in the bordelais press, his celebrity in Bordeaux’s art music circles faded as the years passed. The critic Anatole Loquin pointed to the inclusion of Dédé and twoother Bordeaux composers in the 1878 edition of Fétis's Biographie universelle des musiciens (referred to informally as “Fétis,” it is the nineteenth-century French equivalent to Grove’s Dictionary of Music and Musicians) as evidence of the editor’s comprehensiveness, the implication being that Dédé was not well known in art music circles.47
If Dédé had become relatively unknown in Bordeaux by 1878, he moved deeper into obscurity in the following decade. A list of his major compositions printed in an 1886 issue of The Minstrel, a periodical published in Bordeaux, differs from that in the 1878 edition of Fétis only in the addition of his four-act opera. As the writer in The Minstrel put it, "Monsieur Edmond Dédé, whose name and talent are utterly unknown in Paris, is a Negro [nègre] artiste, who has made something of himself in Bordeaux over twenty years and has a certain reputation as a composer and orchestra leader.”48 As will be made clear further on, to be called a “Negro” had more negative connotations than the rendering of the word into English conveys.
Elis reputation in Bordeaux suffered from his attempt to compose both art music and popular music. Even while he worked for Bazas in the 1860s and most of the 1870s, and then after he moved to the Folies-Bordelaises, he composed orchestral pieces, of which “Mephisto masque” (1889) and “Rêverie champêtre” (1891, a fantasy for violin and cello or flute and bassoon) are two examples that survive. In Fétis, Dédé’s entry lists only two ballets, Nénéha (1862) and La Sensitive (1877), both produced at the Grand Théâtre.4?
During his time at the Alcazar and the Folies-Bordelaises, Dédé also composed several comic operettas. Many of them conformed to the regulations for cafés-concerts in that they were one-act productions and quite fantastical. In 1877, the Alcazar Theater produced two of them, Il faut passer le pont and Le voisin de Thérèse, each one having a run of a week to ten days. In the following year, Dédé s one-act operetta Chik-Kang-Fô, described as a chinoiserie musical, had nine performances at the Alcazar. The comic potential of this orientalist parody, which predated Gilbert and Sullivan’s Mikado by less than a decade, is suggested in the singers’ characters. The caricatural Chinese names Dédé gave his characters—“Fo-li-chon,” “The Executor,” “Pépita the Phyloxereuse” (undoubtedly an evil character; an infestation of phylloxera was killing the grape stock in the Aquitaine between 1875 and 1892), “Ka-Ko-Fé,” “Kok-Ké,” “Ka-Ko-Li, and a band of female singers, the “Kè-Ka-Ka-Ka-Fè-Ko”—suggest just how silly the production was meant to be.5°
As a rule, Dédé left the lyrics to someone else. His usual collaborators were his colleagues in the theaters where he worked. None of them gained a lasting reputation. There is one surviving song, however, whose lyrics and music were likely composed by Dédé. “Bikina" is described as “health advice” (conseil hygiénique) on the cover of the sheet music.5' The illustration shows a young bordelais swell, or gommeux, dressed in a tight-waist jacket, trousers flared at the bottom, vest, bow tie, and high winged collar. His hat rests jauntily on the back of his head. In his left hand he holds a bottle labeled “Bikina.” With the other he points to a poster advertising the drink. Over his shoulder in the background appears the faint interior of a café-concert with a man in a top hat seated at a table, a woman standing beside him, and what looks like a waiter holding a bottle (of Bikina, presumably). An inscription under the title, “Donné par Callen aux Folies-Bordelaises,” indicates that it was performed by a singer named Callen where Dédé was working (fig. 6). The lyrics explain that the qualities of “Bikina” will not get you as drunk as absinthe will. The cover illustration and the lyrics make it clear that Dédé had composed a commercial jingle to be performed during a Folies-Bordelaises show.
The sheet music of “Bikina” is interesting both for what it reveals about the trajectory of Dédé’s career and for the lyricist named on the cover. The year 1881 coincides with the period when he began to have his songs published in Paris, although this one was published in Bordeaux. Nevertheless, Dédé’s compositions were taking an increasingly commercial turn. Paris was not only where the music of greatest prestige was performed, it was also thé capital of the commercial music market. The intense commodification of music— tickets sales, sheet music sales—from the middle of the nineteenth century into the twentieth erected a fence between art music and popular music, patrolled by critics and the wealthy. In the music business, fueled by the desire to increase profits, many composers, musicians, theater managers, and publishers were willing to be led by, rather than lead, public opinion when they made creative or artistic choices. Those musicians who refused to capitulate to public tastes faced the uphill challenge of either finding a patron who would support them in their noble, artistic endeavors (think Richard Wagner and Ludwig II of Bavaria) or occasionally giving in to market demands in order to survive (think Jacques Offenbach). Each musician's goal was to capitulate as seldom as possible, but very few composers and virtuosi were lucky enough to avoid playing or composing for the commercial market in popular music.52
Edmond Dédé did not capitulate so much as he was ineluctably drawn into the powerful undertow of the popular music market. He pivoted toward the sectors of the music world that best compensated him financially, even though he never lost sight of his original ambition, which was to be recognized for his


W55&
Figure 6. Sheet music cover, “Bikina,” 1881, by Edmond Dédé. (By permission of Bibliothèque nationale de France, Département de musique) opera and symphonie pieces. With the success of his ballet, La Sensitive, behind him, Dédé, now in his fifties, began to plan a two-pronged approach to the music world beyond Bordeaux, specifically in Paris. His initial portal was through the Paris song market. His songs, ballets, and orchestral pieces appear to be the markers Dédé was staking along a road leading back to the capital, where he hoped to have a grand opera produced. He had already composed a prodigious amount of music, thereby achieving far more than he ever could have back in the United States. He chose to pursue a career in a popular genre so that he would not have to endure the poverty incumbent on musicians devoted exclusively to their “art.”
This strategy cannot have been an easy one. A reflection of that effort may be hidden in the name of the lyricist of “Bikina.” On the cover of the sheet music, Dédé is named as the composer; tire lyrics are attributed to “Quasimodo.” “Quasimodo,” however, is likely to be Dédé in disguise. “Bikina” is the only one of his songs whose lyricist uses a pseudonym. Quasimodo, the main character in Victor Hugo’s novel Nôtre Dame de Paris (1831), translated into English as The Hunchback of Notre Dame, is a hunchback with a facial disfigurement, whose occupation as bell-ringer of Notre-Dame has made him deaf. Dédé has a previous association with the name. In the 1860s, he entitled a symphony “The Quasimodo Symphony.” Did his use of the name conceal his feelings about his place in French society? Coupled with the likelihood that Dédé composed the “Bikina” lyrics under the name “Quasimodo,” it seems plausible that he was expressing, ironically or plaintively, a sense of how he felt in his adopted country.
If the songs were Dédé’s ticket back to Paris, the staging of his opera would redeem the fare he paid to get there. But the timing of his move to Paris at the end of the 1880s indicates that, in the end, it was a retrenchment. It is hardly surprising that Dédé composed a grand opera. That genre potentially garnered the greatest prestige.” Unfortunately, the opera went missing for the last decade of the nineteenth and for all of the twentieth century. Happily, in 2010 it turned up in Harvard University’s Houghton Library, among a collection of nineteenthcentury opera scores purchased by the library from a collector in Paris.54
The handwritten score of Dédé’s four-act opera, Morgiane, ou, Le sultan d’lspahan, is divided between two bound manuscripts, with acts 1 and 2 in one volume and acts 3 and 4 in another. Three different copyists were involved in their production. One scribe entered the notation and instrumentation. Either the librettist, Louis Brunet, or another scribe filled in the libretto. The third hand belongs to Edmond Dédé, who extensively edited, crossed out entire pages, glued new insertions on top of superseded sections of the score, and entered his own conductor’s notes in his distinctive script, including in blue pencil. This manuscript is the earliest complete opera score by an African American composer and for that reason alone is worthy of further attention.
A close examination of the title page suggests a rethinking on the composer’s part. In a bold, firm hand, the professional scribe had written in the center of the page, “Le Sultan d’Ispahan Opéra en 4 Actes. Paroles de: Louis Brunet. Musique de: Edmond Dédé.” But Dédé wrote above the title, at a slightly haphazard angle, the supertitle, “Morgiane,” the year of composition, “1887,” and place of composition, Bordeaux. This suggests that in 1887, while still living in Bordeaux, Dédé decided rather late in the compositional process that the thematic heart of his one opera lay in the character of Morgiane and not in that of the Sultan of Ispahan. The extent to which Dédé had control over the text is uncertain, but the number of amendments in his hand suggests that he considered it his work. The librettist, Louis Brunet, was the editor of Le Nouvelliste, one of Bordeaux’s minor newspapers.55
In most respects, the opera’s plot is entirely conventional for the nineteenth century. It requires as much suspension of credulity as any other grand opera of the period. Set during an undisclosed period in Ispahan (modern Iran’s Isafan), the Safavid capital of the Persian empire, Morgiane, or, the Sultan of Ispahan opens during the wedding of a young couple, Amine and Ali. Amine's father, Hagi Hassan, reveals to the couple a long-held secret. Long ago, while returning from Mecca, he encountered a beautiful woman, Morgiane, who was fleeing a detested husband, holding a newborn infant in her arms. Hassan carried her and her baby off to a new life.
Amine understands immediately that she is the infant Morgiane carried. Who, then, she implores her mother, is her father, if not Hassan? Morgiane promises to tell her one day. Amine asks her new husband, Ali, whether he now regrets their marriage. But Ali replies that as an orphan, he has no greater claim to honor than she. They swear fidelity to each other. Suddenly, Beher, the sultan of Ispahan’s henchman, enters to claim Amine for the sultan. In vain, the family resists. Beher drags Amine away while Ali and Hassan curse the sultan and swear revenge.
Act 2 brings the protagonists to Ispahan, where they will attempt a rescue of Amine. 1 rassan, Ali, and Morgiane witness the arrival in Ispahan of Beher and his troop with Amine in tow. Her distraught parents and husband plot to gain an audience with the sultan in order to assassinate him. In act 3, the sultan of Ispahan, Kourouscha, is in a courtyard of his palace, where he laments that his love for Amine has made him feel powerless. In the scene’s prologue,the chorus furnishes the information that the sultan has long been a widower. When Amine is brought before the sultan, she declares her fidelity to her husband. In turn, the sultan swears she will become his sultane that same day.
To the sounds of martial music, the coronation of Amine begins with a ballet, which we would expect from a composer who worked as the Grand Theatre's ballet répétiteur. A trio of Arabian singers arrive, who soon reveal themselves to be Ali, Hassan, and Morgiane in disguise. Ali declares that he will foretell the sultan’s future in song. The sultan demurs, having no desire to learn his fate on the day when his new sultane is to be crowned. Ali persists in singing a parable about a Judean shepherd who loved nothing in life so much as his little white lamb, whose beauty made everyone who saw the lamb desire her. The shepherd's lamb is kidnapped, provoking him to swear vengeance. The story very quickly deteriorates into a declaration of Ali’s own revenge on the sultan. Within a few measures, Ali, Hassan, and Morgiane are led off to the sultan’s dungeon.
The denouement of act 4, as any opera lover in the twenty-first century will have guessed by now, occurs when Morgiane confesses at the moment they are all about to be killed that the sultan has fallen in love with his own daughter. The sultan forgives Ali and Amine, Ali forgives the sultan, and, although at first Amine understandably resists embracing her biological father, Ali convinces her to forgive him. Morgiane and Hassan are relegated to the sidelines of the stage and the plot as the curtain descends on a scene of filial mercy.
The contrived plot and the moralizing of Dédé’s Morgiane would have appeared hackneyed and outdated to some contemporaries. In 1870, seventeen years before Dédé put the final touches on his opera, Wagner’s hero Siegfried first “passionately embraced” his twin sister, Sieglinde, in the premiere of Die Walkerie and thus destroyed what little was left of opera’s innocence. Jacques Offenbach’s cynical Tales of Hoffmann premiered in Paris eleven years later in 1881. Like other opera composers of the time, Dédé very likely was going for the big effect by setting the plot of his opera in the Persian empire. Giuseppe Verdi’s Nabucco (1841) and Aida (1871), Georges Bizet’s The Pearl Fishers (1863), and, several decades later, Giacomo Puccini’s Turandot (1924) offered audiences colorful and splendid spectacles on stage. In his case, however, Dédé had internalized the same kind of essentializing stereotypes that white Europeans projected on to people who looked like him, whom they classified as “exotic.” For this reason, until we know more about the opera and how it sounded, we do not have to read too deeply into opera’s setting and lyrics to see how invested he was in common orientalist stereotypes and tropes.56He had been internalizing “exotic” tropes for years by the time he finished his opera. The exotic Orient was not a new genre for Dédé. He had set the operettas he composed for the Folies-Bordelaises in settings—like China—that were considered exotic. Lester Sullivan has speculated that Dédé might have decided on the setting after the season he worked in Algiers, but Dédé was just as likely to have settled upon such a theme without having left France.57 Yet the time spent in Algiers may account for the specificity of certain details, in particular, Hassan’s honorific “Hagi” to indicate his fulfillment of the Hajj; the use of “Allah” to refer to God; and the sultan's name, Kourouschah, which contains the word “shah,” the highest title of the rulers of the Persian empire.
The arresting element of the story concerns the use of white imagery. Several times in his text, the librettist Brunet deploys the color white to signify beauty and purity. When Hassan recalls discovering the distraught refugee mother, he describes Morgiane cradling her infant “in her arms that are whiter than alabaster.” Ali’s parable of the simple shepherd describes his beloved pet as “the whitest of lambs.” And at the end of act 4, after Morgiane has informed Kourouschah that he is about to take his own daughter as his bride, the sultan asks pardon of Amine:
That my impure breath on your face
would mar its color, whiter than a lily,
pardon me, my remorse is sincere, pardon me, dear child, sweet treasure.
Come to my arms and embrace your father
Come embrace him, if he is still worthy.58
The association of the color white with innocence and purity was the stock-in-trade of poets, lyricists, songwriters, authors, and just about every member of Western societies that viewed and still views a universal moral order in terms of black and white. Edmond Dédé was no exception. He was a professional musician and showman who knew how to communicate with his public. The cost to his amour propre employing such imagery can only be imagined. For a black man to deploy such imagery was tantamount to inflicting on himself little nicks similar to those that he felt every time he read or heard a disparaging comment about black skin. One, two, three nicks are not particularly painful. But a lifetime of steady nicks, some big, some small, leads to open wounds that never heal.
Contemporary accounts suggest that a full production of Edmond Dédé’s opera was never mounted on stage in either Bordeaux or Paris. In 1886, a year before the date on the title page in the Houghton Library manuscript, the cultural magazine the Minstrel reported that “a colleague of ours informs us that a grand opera in four acts, the ‘Sultan of Ispahan,’ has just been submitted for the appreciation of M. Graviere, director of the Grand Théâtre of Bordeaux. ”5? Over a year later, the opera had still not been presented there. The author of the profile of Dédé in Bordeaux-Artiste in 1888 chose his words carefully when he wrote, “Some time ago, the maestro has had accepted at the Grand Théâtre an opera in four acts, entitled Le sultan dTspanhan [sic], which awaits only the chance to face the footlights and make the scimitars of his oriental characters shine.”60 Evidently, the management chose not to produce the opera at the theater. It does not appear on the list of productions. Unable to find a producer for the production, Dédé and his wife moved to Paris around 1889. But he had no better luck in the French capital.61
We know relatively little about what Dédé’s music sounded like. Only twice has his music been recorded. In 2000, the classical music label Naxos released on compact disc Edmond Dédé: Mon Pauvre Coeur, a selection of his songs and orchestral works recorded by the Hot Springs Music Festival Symphony Orchestra under the direction of Richard Rosenberg. With the exception of the title track, “Mon pauvre coeur,” published in New Orleans prior to his departure for France in 1855, the compositions include several of the many comic and military songs that Dédé wrote for the theaters where he' worked, such as “Fight in the Fields,” “Cora, the Girl from Bordeaux,” and “My Corporal!” Also included in the recording are the overture, rondeau, duet, and finale of a saynète (a short operetta) called Françoise et Tortillard. The only other recording of a composition by Dédé was released in 2005, Tum-of-the-Century Comet Favorites, among which figures Dédé’s polka for orchestra, “Mephisto masqué,” also included in the Naxos recording. Given Dédé’s productivity, these nineteen or so recorded pieces offer merely a hint of his talent.62
Only two photographs of Edmond Dédé are known to have survived. They accompany the profiles of him in L’Artiste de Bordeaux and Bordeaux-Artiste. The earlier issue lacks a date, so it takes a little cross-checking to calculate when it appeared. The list of his compositions whose dates we know, like Chik-Kang-Fô (1878), allow us to date the piece and the photograph to 1878 at the earliest but not later than 1882. In this first profile, Dédé’s orchestral works, ballet music, and operettas are placed in the foreground. His popular songs come in for mention only at the end: “Let us add to these principal works one hundred and fifty ballet pieces in all genres, numerous fantasies,ninety-five songs, for the most part published in Paris and Bordeaux” (emphasis in the original). The writer stresses his work ethic: “Dédé’s passion for his art is well known. Not a day goes by without his composing a page or two. Composition is, for him, a vital necessity. Thanks to his excellent foundation, serious music studies, and also an astonishing talent, Edmond Dédé deserves to be considered a composer of true merit.” The profile bears all the hallmarks of a self-promoting job application, which it probably was, in spite of its being signed “Aristée.”63 It seems clear, in any case, from the inclusion of works premiered at his second stint at the Alcazar and the absence of references to the Folies-Bordelaises that he was, at the time of the issue’s publication, either looking for work or looking to change jobs.
Nowhere in the first profile does the writer mention that Edmond Dédé is a man of African descent. It was not necessary; the photograph made it apparent (fig. 7). In the now damaged, only surviving copy of the newspaper, the photograph reveals a solid, full-fleshed, dark-skinned man with his hair parted down the center, seated in three-quarter pose. His gaze is directed over his shoulder to his left and slightly downward. He is bundled up in clothing: a buttoned wool jacket, a loose Ascot tie held down with a tie pin, the pointed tips of a white collar obtruding from the jacket’s neckline, and a heavier coat draped over his shoulders. Dédé’s face bears a proud, even haughty expression, so much so that it is hard to believe he is the same man who “Aristée” claims made many dancers “jiggle under the influence of his diabolical quadrilles!” Without reading too much more into the image, Dédé certainly looks the part of a serious, art music composer.
The second photograph accompanies the later and longer profile, this one unsigned and published in Bordeaux-Artiste at some point in either 1887 or 1888 (fig. 8).s4 Even a cursory comparison of the two photographs will convince a skeptical viewer that Dédé’s fortunes had changed in the intervening years. Wearing an ordinary jacket with a narrow, smooth velvet collar, a tie held in place by a tie pin under a stiff, detachable band collar, he sits not quite facing the camera, with his shoulders slumped, gazing in the distance to his left. What looks like the chain of a fob watch, with a small ornament attached, hangs at a buttonhole in the vest under his jacket. A folded handkerchief stands erect out of the jacket front pocket. His natural, untreated hair is no longer divided as it was in the earlier photograph. The composer looks older, more care-worn, a slight furrow in his brow. He has the look of a man who has encountered disappointment.
Some of that disappointment must have involved the uncertain fate of his opera, but attitudes like the one expressed at the beginning of the profile also
Figure 7. Earliest known photograph of Edmond Dédé, appearing in LArtiste de Bordeaux, c. late 1870s or early 1880s. (By permission of the Amistad
Research Center, Tulane University)

had an impact. Whereas the earlier profile, written a few years before or after 1880, contains no reference to Dédé’s ancestry (no doubt in part because he had a hand in writing or directing the writing of it), the writer of this piece, less than a decade later, took another tack.
Agreeable personality, a plebe’s physiognomy, a real bordelais celebrity; perhaps the best-known man in Bordeaux. There are two explanations for it. First, M. Dédé is a Negro [nègre] of the finest black, which helps more than a little, we’re convinced, to make him stand out in a crowd of “pale faces,” as Fenimore Cooper, Gabriel Ferry and Gustave Aimard call them. And, secondly, over a good number of years, he has been exposed to the view of thousands and thousands of spectators, whether at the

Figure 8. Edmond Dédé, original on galley copy of Bordeaux-Artiste, 1887-88.
(By permission of Archives municipales de Bordeaux)

Alcazar, the Grand Théâtre or the Folies-Bordelaises, in his conductor’s chair, rising well above the level of the musicians and the parterre.
Ask yourself: how weary had the nearly sixty-year-old Dédé become of the jokey and ungenerous references to his skin color? The offense he might have taken at the suggestion that he owed his success as much to his skin color as to his music will always be a matter of speculation. But that the French people harbored negative stereotypes of people of color was a reality he must have experienced frequently.
At the start of his piece, the writer of the Bordeaux-Artiste profile identifies Dédé as a nègre, a commonly used noun that was not quite interchangeable with noir. While nègre did not have the same force as the worst racist epithet in English, noir was the more polite usage and the preferred term in official documents.65 And yet French newspapers in the nineteenth century tended to used nègre to refer to people of African ancestry. In the columns of Bordeaux’s most reputable papers the choice of that term worked fist-in-glove with the derogatory, denigrating, and paternalistic tones used to report on the behavior of black and mixed-race people. To take one example, one that verges exceedingly close to Dédé's working world, there appeared in 1882 in La Nouvelliste de Bordeaux, edited by, we should recall, his librettist, Louis Brunet, among the miscellaneous news this item:
between Negroes [Nègres]—Two men of color, engaged until recently as gymnastes at the Alcazar de la Bastide, got into a quarrel last evening in a bar on rue d’Ares.
One of them, named Prouès [Prowess], accused his colleague Taylor, who was always late, of causing him to miss a job that he had contracted for in Angoulême. He pulled out a gun and shot him.
The bullet lodged in Taylor's arm.
The murderer was almost immediately arrested.
Before being placed in the city jail, he declared that he had bought the gun with the intention of killing Taylor.
This confession, shorn of artifice, does not seem to have whiten this vindictive black [noir].66
Or the following from 1889:
poor black [Pauvre Nègre]: The civilization of Negroes is making real progress. We know that in other times travelers obtained from them trinkets and beads; that is no longer the case today. They want puppets at 7 francs, 75 centimes each and richly bound books.
But while their tastes are changing, their methods remain the same.
They love to steal as much as they ever did before. Unfortunately for them, they do not take into account the place where they are and what works in the center of Africa—where there are no policemen—presents a bit more of a problem in the center of Paris, especially in the shopping area of the Hotel de Ville.
However, it was there that a Negro with the finest black skin named Virgile was surprised, having hidden under his frock coat along his back a puppet and under his arm a book.
His alluring features remarked upon, and the hump of the puppet looked none the less bizarre, he was hauled in to the police station.
There, all was explained, and this little adventure ended with the new Virgile receiving a sentence of ten months in prison.6?
These two newspaper items, chosen somewhat at random from similar examples, might have appeared in any French newspaper or anywhere in the United States for that matter. The attitude of intellectual and cultural superiority, the well-worn play on the association of white with innocence and black with evil, and the condescension were and continue to be familiar to anyone who has ever read a newspaper. Newspapers, then and now, tend to reflect back to their readers what society's dominant ethnic or racial group thinks or what the editors want them to think. Nearly two centuries after Dédé’s birth, it ought not to be necessary to point out that the humor displayed in these examples was not benign even in their own time. Behind the seemingly gentle poking fun at the visually distinct people in an overwhelmingly light-skinned or white population lies a set of old attitudes reinforced by geopolitical events around the globe, to which the French people were by no means immune.68 Among the bordelais population—with the roots of their city’s economy embedded in the fruits of slave labor—were a small number of men and women of African descent, most of whom most likely were not as dark-skinned as Edmond Dédé.
As one of the principal ports of entry into France, Bordeaux had a population that was in constant flux. There are no statistical records of the number of foreigners living in Bordeaux before 1888, when the national government, in a particularly xenophobic mood, decreed that all municipalities had to register the foreigners in their jurisdiction. The first such registration and subsequent survey in Bordeaux, carried out between October and December of 1889 found 6,700 foreign nationals in a city with over 200,000 inhabitants. The largest group, not surprisingly, were Spaniards. The Germans, Italians, British, and Swiss formed the next largest national groups. There were 213 U.S. citizens residing in Bordeaux that year.6? Of them 87 were men, 52 were women, and 74 were children. Other sources show that many of them belonged to families attached to companies with branches in Bordeaux. Sincethere is no record of Dédé applying for naturalization as a French citizen, he must have been counted among them. But he was unlikely to have sought French citizenship, since it was a long, complicated, and costly process that discouraged all but the well-to-do.70 Regardless of his national status, as a Creole of color whose first language was French, he would not necessarily have had much of a common bond with those other Americans in Bordeaux, the majority of whom would have been white and English-speaking.
Conscious of his dignity, Dédé was unlikely to have made common cause with the poor migrants who were black or mixed race passing through or settled in Bordeaux. By the time he moved to the Folies-Bordelaises, mixed-race people may not have seen an association with him as advantageous. Small numbers of people of color had settled in Bordeaux since the eighteenth century. The port’s location at a terminus of the transatlantic route connecting France to the Caribbean made it a key entry for economic and political refugees from Saint-Domingue and Cuba. Many of the people of color who came to Bordeaux were sailors in transit and did not stay in the port. With the growth of cafés-concerts and music halls over the second half of the nineteenth century, black performers, many of them gymnasts and specialty acts, like Prouès and the murdered Taylor in the newspaper article, passed through the city.71
Whatever prejudice Dédé confronted in France paled in comparison to what he would have experienced back in New Orleans. With the exception of a few years in the 1870s, he had steady employment as an orchestra leader throughout the 1860s, late 1870s, and 1880s, perhaps not in the professional milieu he would have preferred, but he competed against French musicians for jobs and won them. Popular music has always been popular chiefly among the young and the not-so-young. Growing older, then, cannot have been easy for him, as styles changed and the imperative of keeping up with the public’s taste required a young person’s energy.
His son, Eugène, who helped his father rehearse the orchestra at the Folies- Bordelaises, was already swimming in the current of the popular music business and would make the move to Paris at the end of the 1880s. The chance for the son to make a name for himself was coming; the father’s was passing. The elder Dédé turned sixty in 1887, the year the second profile of him, with the image of his downcast face and slumped shoulders, appeared in print. As the decade of the 1880s drew to a close, his name was mentioned less and less often in the theater and music sections of the newspapers. Certainly there were no more premieres at either the Folies-Bordelaises or the Grand Théâtre. What was there for him in Bordeaux if he was not working?
